---
source: John of Arderne Fistula
format: PDF
extracted: doctour
---



VICTORIA   UNIVERSITY    LIBRARY 
This  book  is  purchased  from 
The  Schofield  Fund 
given  in  memory  of 
William  Henry  Schofield 
Victoria  College,  B.A.  1889 
Harvard  University,  Ph.  D.  1895 
Professor  of  Comparative  Literature 
Harvard  University,  1906-20. 
Harvard  Exchange  P  rofessor  at 
University  of  Berlin,  1907 
Lecturer  at  the  Sorbonne  and 
University  of  Copenhagen,  1910. 
Harvard  Exchange  Professor  at 
Western  Colleges,  1918. 






Crcatises 
at 
offiatttla  in AND  OF  FISTULA  IN  OTHER  PARTS  OF  THE  BODY, 
AND  OF  APOSTEMES  MAKING  FISTULA,  AND  OF  H^IMORRHOID 
AND  TENASMON,  AND  OF  CLYSTERS, 
ALSO  OF  CERTAIN  OINTMENTS,  POWDERS  AND  OILS. 
<6arlg    (Englislj    SUxt 
©rig'mal  Scms.     No.  139. 
1910. 


BERLIN:    ASHER  &    CO.,  13,    UNTER  DEN   LINDEN. 
NEW  YORK:    C.   SCRIBNER  &   CO.;    LEYPOLDT  &   HOLT. 
PHILADELPHIA:    J.    B.  LIPPINCOTT  ~&   CO. 




PLATE  I. 
Sloane  MS.  2002,  leaf  24,  back. 
A  Fourteenth-Century  Master  Surgeon  operating  for  Fistula  in  Ano. 


of 
JOHN   ARDERNE, 
FROM 
AN  EARLY  FIFTEENTH-CENTURY  MANUSCRIPT  TRANSLATION. 
EDITED, 
WITH   INTRODUCTION,  NOTES,  ETC., 
BY 
D'ARCY  POWER,   F.R.C.S.  ENG. SURGEON  TO,   AND  LECTURER  ON  SURGERY   AT,   ST.    BARTHOLOMEW'S   HOSPITAL 
LONDON : 
PUBLISHED    FOR    THE     EARLY    ENGLISH     TEXT    SOCIETY 
BY  KEGAN  PAUL,  TRENCH,  TRUBNER  &  CO.,  LTD., 
DRYDEN    HOUSE,    43    GERRARD    STREET,    SOHO,    W. 
AND   BY  HENRY  EROWDE,  OXFORD  UNIVERSITY  PRESS, 
AMEN    CORNER,    B.C.,    AND    IN    NEW    YORK. 
1910. 


PR 
Az 
to.  133 
uou 
Original  5trit8,  139. 
RICHARD   CI.AT    A    SONS,    LIMITED,    LONDON    AND    BUNOAY. 


To 
Jfranh M.D.  OXON.,  F.R.C.P.  LOND., 
THESE  TREATISES 
OP  ABDERNE 
ARE  DEDICATED 
AS  AN  ACKNOWLEDGMENT  OF  HIS 
ZEAL  IN  THE  CAUSE  OF 
THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH  MEDICINE. 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 
A  Master  of  Surgery  in  the  act  of  operating  upon  a  fistula 
in  ano.     He  wears  the  cap  and  gown  of  his  degree Frontispiece 
PLATE  I.     A  Mastery  of  Surgery  in  the  fourteenth  century 
Facing  page       1 
PLATE  II.  The  instruments  used  by  John  Arderne  in  the  cure  of 
fistula,  from  a  fifteenth-century  manuscript  in  the 
British  Museum  (Sloane  2002)  ....  page  10 
PLATE  III.  The  instruments  used  in  the  operation  of  a  fistula  in 
ano  from  the  early  fifteenth-century  manuscript 
(Sloane  6)  printed  in  this  book.  The  instruments 
named  from  above  downwards  are : — the  sequere  me 
or  probe:  the  syringa  or  syringe:  the  acus  rostrata 
or  snowted  needle :  the  fraenum  Caesaris  or  fourfold 
thread  :  the  cochlear  or  shield :  the  tendiculum  and 
wrayste  or  vertile  (cf.  p.  112).  The  left-hand  figure 
shows  the  surgeon  probing  a  sinus  in  the  buttock; 
the  right-hand  figure  shows  the  tendiculum,  wrayste 
and  fraenum  Caesaris  in  position  just  before  two  sinuses 
are  laid  open  in  the  left  buttock.  The  snowted  needle 
is  about  to  be  drawn  through  a  series  of  fistulae  in 
the  right  buttock  ....  Facing  page  10 
PLATE  IV.     A  series  of  drawings  to  illustrate  the  various  occupations 
of  a  leech   page     99 


IX 
FOREWORDS 
THE  history  of  mediaeval  medicine,  says  Prof.  E.  Nicaise,1  has 
been  divided  into  four  great  epochs.  The  first,  lasting  from  the  fifth 
to  the  eleventh  century,  was  remarkable  for  the  Arabian  school  of 
medicine.  The  second  period  embraced  the  eleventh  and  twelfth 
centuries,  and  witnessed  the  rise  of  the  schola  Salernitana  :  it  was  the 
time  of  the  Crusades  and  of  that  intermingling  of  the  East  and  West 
from  which  sprang  the  marvellous  work  of  the  twelfth  and  thirteenth 
centuries.  The  work  of  the  third  period  was  all  too  short,  and  was 
brought  to  a  sudden  close  by  the  Black  Death  which  ravaged  the 
world  in  1348-9.  It  is  properly  described  as  the  beginning  of  the 
modem  era,  the  pre-Renaissance.  A  mere  list  of  the  Universities 
established  will  give  some  idea  of  the  intellectual  activity  of  the 
time.  Montpellier  (1137);  Paris  (1176);  Oxford  (1200) ;  Cambridge 
(1209);  Padua  (1222);  Naples  (1224);  Salamanca  (1230);  Toulouse 
(1230) ;  Orleans  (1231);  Valladolid  (1250);  Seville  (1254);  Coimbra- 
Lisbon  (1290);  Lerida  (1300);  Avignon  (1303);  Rome  (1303); 
Grenoble  (1332);  Angers  (1337);  Pisa  (1343);  Prague  (1347); 
Florence  (1349);  Perpignan  (1349) ;  Huesca  (1359);  Cracovia(J364) ; 
Pavia  (1365) ;  Orange  (1365) ;  Vienna  (1365) ;  Erfurt  (1379) ;  Heidel- 
berg (1385) ;  Cologne  (1388)  ;  Buda  (1389).2  The  fourth  period  was 
retrograde.  Wars  abroad  and  economic  troubles  at  home  seemed  to 
have  crushed  the  spirit  of  the  few  survivors  from  the  previous 
generation. 
John  Arderne  belongs  to  the  thirteenth  century  in  spirit  and  in 
thought,  although  the  accident  of  birth  placed  him  in  the  next 
generation.  He  was  well  educated,  and  he  reflects  the  current  ideas 
of  his  time  just  as  every  well-educated  surgeon  at  the  present  day  is 
an  epitome  of  his  surroundings.  Nothing  is  known  of  his  history 
except  for  the  autobiographical  details  given  in  the  various  manu- 
scripts of  his  works  and  a  small  body  of  floating  tradition  which  has 
been  handed  down  through  the  centuries. 
1  "La  grande  chirurgie  de  Guy  de  Chauliac."     Paris,  1890,  pp.  x-xv. 2  The  dates  appended  to  the  Universities  are  merely  intended  to  show  when 
each  was  known  to  be  actually  in  existence — a  few  were  created,  the  majority developed  from  small  beginnings. 


x  Forewords. 
BIOGRAPHICAL  FACTS. 
There  seems  to  be  little  doubt  that  he  was  a  member  of  the  family 
of  Arderne,  or.Arden,  who  claimed  descent  from  Saxon  times.  The 
best  known  representative  of  the  family  was  Turchill  or  Turketil, 
styled  de  Warwic  in  Domesday,  and  De  Eardene  in  the  Register  of 
Abingdon  Abbey,  "  being  one  of  the  first  here  in  England  that,  in 
imitation  of  the  Normans,  assumed  a  surname.1  The  Ardernes  were 
Lords  of  Watford  in  Northamptonshire  from  1140,  and  spread  thence 
to  Cheshire  and  Staffordshire.  In  the  Aldford,  Cheshire,  branch  the 
name  of  John  was  borne  hereditarily  by  John  de  Arderne  (fl.  1220) ; 
Sir  John  de  Arderne  (1266-1308?);  Sir  John  de  Arderne  (1307- 
1349) ;  and  John  de  Arderne  (fl.  1332).2  It  was  possibly  the  last- 
named  John  Arderne3  who  received  a  grant  of  land  in  Connaught 
from  Edward  the  Black  Prince  (Appendix,  p.  105),  and  who  is 
mentioned  in  John  of  Gaunt's  Register4  as  having  been  appointed 
Seneschal  of  the  manor  of  Passenham  in  Northamptonshire  on  October 
7th,  1374.  The  name  of  John  Arderne,  or  John  de  Arderne,  there- 
fore, was  well  known  in  London,5  in  the  midlands  and  in  the  counties 
of  Cheshire  and  Lancaster  during  the  fourteenth  century,  but  there 
is  no  evidence  forthcoming  at  present  to  show  to  which  branch  of  the 
family  the  surgeon  belonged. 
The  date  of  Arderne's  birth  is  fixed  by  his  own  statement  that  he 
was  seventy  in  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  Richard  II.  Edward  III 
died  at  Sheen  on  June  21,  1377,  and  was  immediately  succeeded  by 
Richard  II.  Arderne,  therefore,  was  born  in  1307.6  It  is  clear  too 
that  he  practised  abroad,  for  he  says  that  he  tried  a  remedy  "in  foreign 
1  Dugdale,  675. 
8  "Parentalia,"  Genealogical  Memoirs,  compiled  by  George  Ormerod,  D.C.L. F.R.S.,  privately  printed  1851. 
3  Perhaps  it  was  this  John  Arderne  who  is  mentioned  in  Rymer's  "Feedera" (vol.  ii,  part  2,  p.  119,  col.  2).  He  was  commanded  to  attend  the  King  in  war 
to  Guienne  in  the  year  1324. 
*  I,  337,  leaf  64,  back.  I  am  indebted  to  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Sydney  Armitage- Smith  for  this  reference. 
5  In  London  John  Arderne  was  a  Fishmonger  in  1361,  and  Richard  Arderne was  a  prominent  Skinner  in  1376.  John  Arderne,  esquire,  was  living  in  the 
parish  of  St.  Mary  Aldermariachurch  in  1425.  (Dr.  Reginald  Sharpe's  "  Calendar 
of  Wills — Court  of  Husting."  London,  part  2,  pp.  63  and  439.) 
8  Sloane  MS.  75,  leaf  146.  De  Cura  Oculi.  "Et  sciant  presentes  et  futuri quoad  Ego  Magister  Johannes  de  Ardern,  cirurgorum  minimus,  hunc  libellum 
propria  manu  mea  exaravi  apud  London  ;  anno,  videlicet  regis  Ricardi  2di  primo 
et  etatis  me  Ixx.  ("And  be  it  known  to  present  and  future  generations  that  I, Master  John  of  Ardern,  the  least  of  the  surgeons,  scribbled  this  book  with  my 
own  hand  in  London  in  the  year,  viz.  the  first  year  of  the  reign  of  King  Richard 
the  Second  and  in  the  seventieth  year  of  my  age.") 


Forewords.  xi 
parts  upon  one  King  and  two  Bishops." l  I  have  no  doubt  in  my  own 
mind  that  the  king  was  John  of  Gaunt,  "Koy  de  Castell  et  de  Leon, 
Due  de  Lancastre,"  who  was  always  addressed  as  "  Monseigneur 
d'Espaigne."  2  In  1376  John  of  Gaunt  was  the  best  hated  man  in 
England,  says  Mr.  Sydney  Armitage-Smith  in  his  valuable  study  of 
his  life.  It  was  undesirable,  therefore,  John  Arderne  would  think,  to 
draw  too  close  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  had  once  been  attached  to 
his  person,  for  the  book  was  written  in  this  very  year  1376.  The 
precaution  was  wise  in  view  of  the  events  which  happened  when  a 
London  mob  burnt  the  Duke's  palace  at  the  Savoy  in  1381  and 
killed  his  physician,  merely  because  he  was  a  trusted  and  valued 
friend.3  Mr.  Sydney  Armitage-Smith4  says  that  the  name  of  the 
physician  was  William  de  Appleton,  and  that  he  was  retained  by 
the  Duke  of  Lancaster  at  40  marcs  per  annum  for  life.  An  in- 
teresting example  of  the  caution  which  was  habitual  to  Ardern  in 
this  matter  is  to  be  found  in  two  of  the  manuscripts  in  the  British 
Museum.  The  one  5  tells  of  a  certain  noble  knight  in  the  service  of 
the  Duke  of  Lancaster  at  Algebras,  in  Spain,  who  had  a  sudden  attack 
of  facial  paralysis,  which  so  twisted  his  mouth  that  it  was  drawn  back 
nearly  to  his  ear  and  prevented  him  from  speaking.  The  manuscript 
continues,  "  I,  the  aforesaid  John  Ardern,  made  a  cure  of  him."  The 
second  manuscript6  gives  an  account  of  the  same  case,  but,  instead  of 
giving  any  name  to  the  leech  who  cured  him,  it  merely  says  "  for 
whom  the  King  of  Spain's  doctor  made  a  cure  in  this  way."  7  The 
latter  MS.  is  a  magnificently  written  copy  on  vellum,  with  such 
carefully  executed  illustrations  that  it  is  usually  exhibited  in  the 
British  Museum  as  an  example  of  fourteenth-century  work.  It  was 
possibly  a  presentation  copy  to  John  of  Gaunt  himself;  the  first  one 
is  a  poorly  written  paper  manuscript,  such  as  would  have  an  ordinary 
1  MS.  bought  at  the  Towneley  Sale.     It  is  now  in  the  Surgeon  General's 
Library  at  Washington,  U.S.A.     The  extract  on  leaf  54  is,  "  Hoc  probavi  in  uno 
rege  et  duobus  episcopis  in  transmarinis  partibus."     It  is  quoted  in  the  "Johns 
Hopkins  Bulletin,"  vol.  v,  1894,  pp.  21  and  67,  but  I  am  indebted  to  the  courtesy of  Lieut. -Col.  Walter  D.  McCaw,  Librarian  S.  G.  0.,  for  a  complete  transcription 
of  the  passage. 
2  "John  of  Gaunt,"  by  Sydney  Armitage-Smith,  p.  258. J  Johannes  de  ordine  Minoram  in  armis  bellicis  strenuus,  in  physica  peritis- 
simus,  domino  Johanni  duci  Lancastriae  familiarissimus." — Knighton's  Chronicle- Rolls  Series,  ii,  133. 
4  Op.  cit.  p.  248,  note.  6  Sloane  MS.  3548.  6  Sloaue  29301. 
7  "  Quidam  miles  nobilis  Ducis  Lancastriae  apud  Agezir  in  Hispania  passus est  subito  torturam  oris  ita  quod  os  ejus  distractum  fuit  fere  retro  aurem  nee 
loqui  poterat.  Ego  Predictus  Job.  Ardern  talem  feci  sibi  curam  "  (MS.  3548). 
"Cni  medicus  regis  hyspaniae  talem  curam  fecit,"  says  MS.  29301. 


xii  Forewords. 
circulation.  It  was  copied  at  a  much  later  date,  for  the  scribe,  by 
mistake,  has  written  Henrici  de  Arderne,  and  it  belonged  to  Robert 
May. 
Haeser1  says  that  perhaps  Arderne  was  educated  at  Montpellier 
and  practised  in  France  as  a  military  surgeon  on  the  English  side 
during  the  earlier  and  most  brilliant  years  of  the  One  Hundred  Years' 
War.  E.  H.,  who  translated  his  "  Latin  practises  and  consailes 
concerning  the  helping  of  all  diseases," 2  in  the  early  part  of  the 
seventeenth  century,  is  responsible  for  the  statement  that  he  practised 
at  Antwerp,  and  he  certainly  knew  a  few  words  of  Flemish,  for,  in 
speaking  of  the  Nightshade,  he  says  that  in  Flanders  it  is  called 
"Naghtstach"  (p.  32). 
Dr.  Milward 3  believed  that  he  was  present  at  the  battle  of  Cre9y, 
but  this  I  take  leave  to  doubt.  He  practised,  or  at  any  rate  he  treated 
patients,  in  Wiltshire,4  and  from  1349  until  1370  he  lived  at  Newark 
in  Nottinghamshire.5  He  came  to  London  in  1370,  but  I  have  found 
no  record  of  where  he  lived.  It  was  the  year-  of  his  grand  climacteric, 
in  an  age  when  men  lived  a  much  shorter  time  than  now,  yet  he 
practised  with  vigour  and  success  for  five  or  six  years.  By  this  time 
he  had  secured  a  competence  and  he  set  himself  to  write.  In  1376  he 
issued  his  treatise  on  the  cure  of  Fistula  in  ano  which  is  here  printed, 
"  written,"  as  he  says,  "  with  my  own  hand,  in  the  year  when  the 
strong  and  warlike  Lord  "  (Edward  the  Black  Prince)  "  was  taken  to 
God."6  It  is  possible  that  the  treatise  on  Clysters7  was  already 
written;  it  is  certain  that  the  treatise  "De  cura  oculorum"  was 
written  in  1377,8  but  we  know  nothing  more  than  this  about  John 
Arderne.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  he  was  living  in  the  reign 
of  Henry  IV,  who  came  to  the  throne  in  1399.  The  reference  to 
Henry  IV  (p.  74),  "  With  this  medicine  was  kyng  Henry  of  ynglond 
cured  of  the  going  out  of  the  lure,"  is  a  side-note  written  in  a  different 
hand  in  some  of  the  MSS.  and  has  only  crept  into  the  English  text  in 
1  "Lehrbuch  d.  geschichte  der  Med.,"  ed.  3,  Jena,  1875,  i,  784. 2  Sloane  MS.  2271. 
3  A  circular   invitatory  letter  .  .  .  concerning  .  .  .    British   Physical  and Chirurgical  Authors,  by  Edward  Milward,  M.  D.,  Lond.  1740,  p.  23. 
4  "Hoc  probavi  in  vicecomite  Wilteshure,"  says  the  MS.  in  the  Surgeon- 
General's  Library  at  Washington,  U.S.A.,  quoted  in  the  "Johns  Hopkins  Hos- 
pital  Bulletin,"   vol.  v,  1894,   pp.  21  and  67,   and   I   am   again  indebted  to Lieut. -Col.  M°Caw  for  verifying  the  reference. B  Teste  all  the  MSS. 
6  "Et  eodem  anno  quo  Dominus  strenuus  et  bellicosus  Princeps  migravit  ad Dominum,  scripsi  libellum  istura  manu  propria,  viz.  Millesimo  ccclxxvi.   .  .  . 
quern  Deus  absolvat,  quia  fuit  flos  Milicise  Mundi  sine  pare." 
7  See  postea,  p.  74  et  seqq.  8  P.  x,  note  6,  of  these  Forewords. 


Forewords.  xiii 
process  of  time.  The  Hunterian  copy  of  the  Commentary  in  English 
on  "  Aegidii  Corboliensis  tractatus  metricus  de  Urinis,"  which  mentions 
the  leech  of  "  our  Lord  King  the  most  illustrious  prince  Henry  the 
Fourth,  on  whose  soul  may  God  have  Mercy,  Amen,"  was  clearly 
written  after  20  March,  1413,  and  the  scribe  has  forgotten  Arderne's 
right  name,  for  he  says  that  it  is  written  by  Master  John  Arderon.1 
It  seems  to  me  that  the  easiest  way  to  correlate  the  various  facts 
recorded  about  John  Arderne  is  to  assume  that  he  was  attached  at  first 
to  Henry  Plantagenet,  the  first  Duke  of  Lancaster,  and  afterwards  to 
John  of  Gaunt,  who  married  his  younger  daughter  Blanche  as  his  first 
wife — the  White  Lady  of  Chaucer's  "  Book  of  the  Duchess."  Henry, 
as  Earl  of  Derby,  was  at  Antwerp  in  1338,  and  John  Arderne  is  said 
to  have  practised  there.  Henry,  in  company  with  the  Earl  of  Salisbury, 
fought  against  the  Moors  at  the  siege  of  Alge9iras  in  1343,  when  much 
use  was  made  of  Greek  fire,  and  gunpowder  is  said  to  have  been 
employed  for  the  first  time.  John  Arderne  had  been  to  Alge9iras 
because  he  treated  a  knight  there  who  was  suffering  from  a  trivial 
complaint  from  which  he  would  have  recovered  during  the  long 
journey,  if  he  had  visited  Arderne  in  England.  Arderne  was  interested 
both  in  Greek  fire  and  in  gunpowder,  for  he  gives  a  receipt  for  making 
Ignis  Grsecus  and  for  an  artificial  fire  to  burn  ships.  Henry  of 
Lancaster  was  Lieutenant  and  Captain  of  Aquitaine  in  1345,  and  was 
granted  the  town  of  Bergerac  with  the  right  of  coinage  in  1347.  John 
Arderne  nowhere  says  specifically  that  he  served  with  the  Earl  of 
Derby,  Duke  of  Lancaster,  but  he  betrays  an  intimate  knowledge  of 
this  campaign,  for  he  gives  the  names  of  the  towns  in  the  order  in 
which  they  were  reached  by  the  invading  army  and  not  in  their 
geographical  succession ;  his  knowledge  is  even  remarkable,  for  he 
gives  the  towns  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  reached  by  a  single 
column  of  the  army,  and  he  was  writing  more  than  thirty  years  after 
the  events.2 
1  "Ego  Magister  Johannes  Arderonn  hoc  opusculum  composui  de  judiciis urinarum  per  colores    et  contenta   secundum   indicium   Egidii    et  Ypocratis, 
"Walterii,  Gilis,  Gilberti,  Gordoni,  Johannia  de  Sancto  Amando,  Ysaac,  Auicenne, theophili,  Galyeni,  Galterii  et  tholomei  in  raedicinam  et  medicum  domini  regis 
illustrissimi  priucipis  henrici  quarti  cujus  anime  propicietur  deus.    Amen. "    The MS.  is  in  the  Hunterian  Library  at  Glasgow,  No.  328,  U.  7,  22  (cf.  Notes,  59/32). 
2  "  The  forsaid  sir  Adam  (p.  1,  line  12  et  seqq.)  forsooth  suffering  from  fistula in  ano  asked  counsel  of  all  the  leeches  and  surgeons  that  he  could  find  in  Gascony, 
at  Bordeaux,  at  Bergerac,  Toulouse,  Narbonne  and  Poitiers."     Arderne  seems  to have  had  a  soft  place  in  his  heart  for  Narbonne.     He  calls  one  of  his  favourite 
plaisters  Emplastron  de  Nerbon,  and  says,  "Istud  emplastron  dicitur  Norbon 
quia  quamvis  sit  nigrum  tarnen  bonum."     ("This  emplastre  is  called  Noirbon, 
for  although  it  be  black  nevertheless  it  is  good."     P.  91,  1.  31.) 


xiv  Forewords. 
The  campaign  ended  and  the  Duke  of  Lancaster  returned  to 
London,  13th  January,  1347-8,  and  died  of  the  plague  at  Leicester  in 
1361.  John  Arderne  may  then  have  attached  himself  to  John  of 
Gaunt,  the  son-in-law  of  the  Duke,  who  called  himself  King  of  Castile 
and  Leon  from  his  marriage  with  Constance,  daughter  of  Don  Pedro 
I  of  Castile,  in  September  1371,  until  his  own  daughter  Katherine 
married  Enrique  III  in  1388,  and  became  Queen  of  Castile  and 
Leon  in  1390.  If  Arderne  was  really  surgeon  to  the  King  of  Castile 
it  must  have  been  after  the  year  1370,  and  this  perhaps  gives  the 
reason  why  John  Arderne  left  Newark  after  he  had  practised  there  for 
so  many  years.  Mr.  Armitage-Smith  tells  me,  however,  that  there  is 
no  record  of  such  an  appointment  in  the  Duke's  roll  which  he  has 
lately  published. 
ARDERNE  AS  A  SURGEON. 
John  Arderne  is  a  good  example  of  a  type  of  surgeon  who  has 
happily  never  been  absent  from  England.  He  is  the  earliest  example 
that  we  know  at  present,  but  he  was  followed  in  direct  succession  by 
Thomas  Morstede,  who  was  present  at  Agin  court  in  1415,  and  was 
buried  in  St.  Olave,  Upwell,  in  the  Jewry,  in  1450 ;  by  Richard  Ferris, 
who  wrote  nothing,  but  was  revered  as  their  master  by  many  succeed- 
ing generations  of  surgeons  in  London.  He  died,  an  old  man,  in 
1566,  and  had  seen  much  service  in  the  wars  of  Henry  VIII. 
William  Clowes  (1540-1604),  my  great  predecessor  at  St.  Bartholo- 
mew's Hospital,  learnt  much  of  him.  Clowes  handed  on  the  tradition 
to  John  Woodall  (1556-1643),  and  Woodall  to  Eichard  Wiseman 
(1622-1676),  the  surgeon  of  the  Commonwealth.  Wiseman  was 
succeeded  by  Samuel  Sharp  (1700  (?)-1778)  of  Guy's  Hospital,  and 
by  Percivall  Pott  (1714-1788)  at  St.  Bartholomew's.  The  dis- 
tinguishing mark  of  each  was  the  possession  of  the  qualities  which 
make  an  English  gentleman  as  well  as  a  fine  surgeon.  They  were 
all  men  of  good  education,  wide  experience,  and  sound  judgment. 
John  Arderne  possessed  these  qualities  in  abundance.  He  preferred 
personal  experience  to  the  teaching  of  the  schools.  He  would  rather 
learn  by  experiment  than  by  authority,  and  with  characteristic  frank- 
ness he  related  his  failures  as  well  as  his  successes  (p.  83).  He  was 
not  in  advance  of  his  time,  for  he  believed,  like  every  one  else,  in 
Astrology  (p.  16).  He  kept  his  methods  as  secret  as  he  could  by 
giving  fancy  names  to  his  ointments  and  plaisters  (p.  89),  and  by 
writing  his  charm  in  Greek  letters  "  ne  a  laicis  perspicietur  "  (p.  103). 


Forewords.  xv 
John  Arderne  wrote  on  Fistula,  on  diseases  of  the  Eye,  on  Clysters, 
on  Bleeding ;  on  Plants  and  their  Uses,  and  he  also  published  a 
common-place  book  containing  various  receipts  and  notes  of  cases 
arranged  without  any  method.  There  exists  also  his  Commentary  on 
Giles  de  Corbeil's  metrical  treatise  "de  Urinis"  (p.  xiii,  note  1),  and  he 
is  the  author  of  a  "  Scala  Sanitatis  contra  plagas."  By  some  means  he 
had  access  to  a  large  medical  library,  for  he  quotes  the  very  words  of 
the  manuscripts  to  which  he  refers  in  his  treatise  on  Haemorrhoids 
(p.  55,  line  3),  and  it  is  evident  that  they  were  lying  before  him  as  he 
wrote.  It  is  clear  from  the  number  of  manuscripts  which  still  remain 
in  the  various  libraries  (Bibliography,  pp.  xxxiv  and  xxxv)  that 
Arderne's  works  were  read  and  valued  by  his  contemporaries  and 
immediate  successors.  They  were  written  originally  in  Latin,  and, 
as  he  is  careful  to  explain,  with  his  own  hand,  but  English  trans- 
lations were  soon  produced.  The  Latin  is  of  the  colloquial  type  like 
that  in  which  the  "Epistolae  Obscurorum  Virorum"  was  written  in 
the  early  years  of  the  sixteenth  century,  neither  better  nor  worse,  and 
when  Arderne  was  at  fault  for  a  Latin  word  he  never  scrupled  to  use 
its  English  or  French  equivalent.  His  handwriting  was  as  crabbed  as 
his  style,  if,  as  there  is  some  reason  for  believing,  the  Sloane  MS., 
No.  75,  is  a  holograph  in  so  far  as  it  deals  with  diseases  of  the  eyes. 
The  treatise  on  Fistula  in  Ano  is  certainly  the  most  interesting  and 
practical  of  Arderne's  works.  John  Read  published  an  abstract  of  a 
part  of  this  treatise  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Elizabeth,  but  it  has  never 
been  printed  in  full  until  now,  and  for  this  purpose  an  early  fifteenth- 
century  translation  has  been  selected. 
THE  TREATMENT  OF  FISTULA  IN  ANO. 
Arderne's  attention  was  no  doubt  called  to  the  subject  of  Fistula 
by  the  actual  cases  Avhich  came  to  him  for  relief.  The  hardship  of  the 
Hundred  Years'  War  must  have  produced  many  cases  of  ischio-rectal 
abscess  which  ended  in  fistula.  Wet,  cold,  long  hours  in  the  saddle 
weighted  down  by  the  heavy  armour  of  the  time,  would  readily  lead 
to  this  condition  in  the  knightly  class ;  whilst  the  sedentary  habits 
and  gross  feeding  causing  chronic  constipation  would  account  for  it 
in  the  religious  and  civic  population.  Tubercle,  too,  was  rife  in  the 
fourteenth  century,  but  it  would  be  interesting  to  learn  whether  the 
Black  Death  left  an  aftermath  of  boils  and  abscesses.  The  work  is 
full  of  detail,  and  shows  the  author  to  be  original,  thoughtful, 
observant,  and  a  master  of  his  art  both  in  theory  and  practice.  He 
ARDERXE.  l> 


xvi  Forewords. 
says,  very  rightly,  that  the  treatment  of  fistula  in  ano  had  fallen  into 
disrepute  because  it  was  a  troublesome  condition  which  brought 
very  little  credit  to  surgeons,  whilst  it  required  long  and  patient 
treatment  for  which  the  majority  of  the  sufferers  were  not  prepared  to 
pay.  An  examination  of  the  writings  of  the  immediate  predecessors 
and  contemporaries  of  John  Arderne  shows  that  these  statemeuts  are 
literally  correct.  To  go  back  no  farther  than  Albucasis,  who  died  in 
1013,1  it  was  taught  that  complete  fistulas  were  incurable,  and  that  all 
operations  and  the  application  of  ointments  was  but  labour  in  vain. 
Some  believed  that  a  cure  could  be  obtained  occasionally,  and  Albucasis 
advised,  therefore,  that  a  small  copper  or  iron  probe  should  be  intro- 
duced into  the  bowel  through  the  fistula  which  should  then  be  laid 
open  in  its  whole  extent  until  the  probe  fell  out.  But  if  the  bleeding 
were  so  severe  as  to  stop  the  operation,  or  the  surgeon  was  afraid  of 
the  haemorrhage,  the  actual  cautery  might  be  used.  In  other  cases, 
Albucasis  taught,  a  probe  armed  with  a  ligature  of  five  strands  might 
be  passed  from  the  external  orifice  of  the  fistula  through  its  track  into 
the  rectum.  The  end  of  the  probe  was  then  caught  by  the  finger 
and  drawn  out  through  the  anus  bringing  with  it  one  end  of  the 
ligature.  The  two  ends  of  the  ligature,  the  one  hanging  out 
•of  the  fistula  and  the  other  from  the  anus,  were  then  tied  tightly 
together,  care  being  taken  to  include  as  much  tissue  as  possible.  The 
knot  was  tightened  on  the  second  or  third  day,  and  as  often  afterwards 
as  was  necessary.  The  fistula  was  thus  cured  by  the  ligature  cutting 
its  way  out,  the  track  behind  it  healing  by  granulation. 
William  de  Salicet  (fl.  1245),  who  taught  surgery  at  Bologna,  and 
was  considered  the  most  skilful  surgeon  of  his  age,  had  so  great  a 
dread  of  fistula  that  he  wrote  : 2  "  When  the  fistula  is  complete  it  is 
assuredly  so  difficult  to  cure  that  it  is  better  and  more  honourable  for 
the  surgeon  to  give  up  the  case  at  once.  But  if  he  decide  to  under- 
take it  the  orifice  should  be  dilated  with  a  sponge  tent  and  the  whole 
track  burnt  with  the  actual  cautery.  If  this  fails  the  fistula  may  be 
laid  open  into  the  bowel  by  a  seton  of  silk,  horsehair  or  cow's  hair 
pulled  to  and  fro  daily  like  a  saw  until  it  cuts  its  way  out ;  but,"  he 
adds,  as  a  warning,  "  I  have  seen  bad  results  from  this  method  of 
cure." Lanfrank,  the  most  distinguished  pupil  of  William  de  Salicet,  who 
1  "Methodus  Medcndi  certa,  clara  et  brevis,"  Lib.  ii,  cap.  810.     Basil,  1541, 
p.  132. 
2  "  Chirurgie  de  Guillaume  de  Salicet."   Paul  Pifteau.   Toulouse,  1898,  p.  139. 


Forewords  xvii 
died  in  1306,  the  year  before  John  Arderne  was  born,  contents  himself 
with  saying  that  fistulae  are  incurable,  and  he  utters  a  lamentable  cry 
against  those  who  would  attempt  to  operate  even  if  it  were  only  by 
applying  a  corrosive,1 
Henri  de  Mondeville  (1260(?)-1320(?))  merely  enlarged  the  oritice 
of  the  fistula  with  a  tent,  and  utterly  condemns  the  teaching  of  the 
school  of  Salernum,  as  represented  by  Roger  and  Roland,  who  would 
operate  and  afterwards  apply  a  painful  corrosive,2 — and  de  Mondeville 
was  in  Paris  what  Arderue  was  in  London,  a  first-rate  surgeon. 
Guy  de  Chauliac  (d.  1368),  prince  of  the  mediaeval  writers  of 
surgical  text-books,  published  his  "  Great  Surgery "  thirteen  years before  Arderne  wrote  his  treatise  on  Fistula.  After  the  manner  of 
text-books  various  operations  are  described  for  the  cure  of  fistula, 
each  with  insufficient  details,  and  the  reader  is  left  in  doubt  as  to 
which,  if  any,  is  to  be  employed.3 
ARDERNE'S  OPERATION  FOR  FISTULA. 
John  Arderne's  operation  is  clearly  a  modification  of  the  method 
recommended  by  Albucasis,  and,  like  a  good  surgeon,  he  preferred  a 
clean  incision  to  fretting  the  fistula  through  with  a  ligature  tied 
tightly.  He  recommends  that  the  patient  should  be  secured  in  the 
lithotomy  position.  A  probe — called  appropriately  enough,  sequere 
me — is  passed  through  the  fistula  until  it  is  felt  in  the  rectum.  The 
eye  of  the  probe  is  then  threaded  with  a  ligature  of  four  strands — the 
frsenum  Caesaris — which  is  drawn  through  the  fistula  as  the  probe  is 
pulled  out  of  the  rectum  until  one  end  hangs  out  of  the  anus  and  the 
other  from  the  opening  of  the  fistula.  These  two  ends  are  knotted 
together  and  the  whole  ligature  is  tightened  by  means  of  a  peg — the 
wrayste — fixed  into  the  widest  part  of  a  gorget — the  tendiculum — in 
the  same  way  that  a  violin  peg  tightens  the  strings  passing  round  it. 
The  use  of  the  ligature  is  partly  to  control  the  bleeding  and  partly  to 
maintain  a  correct  line  while  the  fistula  is  being  divided.  The  gorget 
or  tendiculum  is  pushed  well  up  into  the  fistula  and  a  grooved  director 
with  a  curved  end — the  acus  rostrata,  or  snowted  needle — is  passed 
along  it  until  the  end  projects  into  the  rectum  where  the  probe  had 
1  Lanfrank's  "Science  of  Cirurgie,"  Early  English  Text  Society,  No.  102, 
pp.  292-3. 
2  "Chirurgie  de  Maitre  Henri  de  Mondeville."    E.  Nicaise.     Paris,   1893, p.  465. 
3  "La  Grande  Chirurgie  de  Guy  de  Chauliac,  composed  en  1'an  1363."     E. Nicaise.     Paris,  1890,  p.  134. 


xviii  Forewords. 
been  previously  inserted.  A  shield — the  cochlearia,  or  spoon — with 
a  depression  in  its  centre  is  then  passed  through  the  anus  until  the 
grooved  director  engages  in  the  depressed  notch.  The  object  of  this 
shield  is  partly  to  prevent  the  surgeon  cutting  down  upon  his  own 
finger  and  partly  to  protect  the  opposite  wall  of  the  rectum  should 
the  patient  struggle  or  make  a  sudden  movement  at  the  moment  the 
fistula  is  divided.  A  scalpel — the  razor  or  lance — is  passed  along  the 
groove  in  the  acus  rostrata,  and  the  fistula  is  cleanly  divided  along 
its  whole  length  by  drawing  the  knife,  the  acus  rostrata,  and  the 
spoon  out  of  the  rectum  with  a  single  movement,  the  ligature  or 
frsenum  Csesaris  coming  away  at  the  same  time.  Each  branch  of  the 
fistula  may  be  laid  open  in  turn  if  the  patient  can  bear  it,  or  any 
farther  operation  can  be  postponed,  as  Arderne  had  found  by  experi- 
ence that  when  the  main  track  was  laid  open  the  other  channels  often 
healed  of  themselves. 
The  operation  was  a  good  one,  except  that  his  instruments  were 
needlessly  cumbersome,  and  would  cure  a  fistula  equally  well  at  the 
present  day,  but  the  great  advance  which  Arderne  made  was  in  avoid- 
ing the  corrosive  and  irritating  after-treatment  used  by  every  one 
else.  It  is  difficult  now  to  put  ourselves  in  his  position  and  to  realize 
what  an  amount  of  originality  it  meant  for  a  surgeon  in  the  fourteenth 
century  to  leave  a  wound  alone  and  not  to  try  and  kill  it  with  the  actual 
cautery  or  with  caustics.  Such  a  method  was  contrary  to  all  teaching, 
and  would  seem  to  be  undertaken  with  the  very  greatest  risk.  Yet 
John  Arderne  only  applied  a  little  oil  of  roses  with  the  white  or  yolk 
of  an  egg,  and  he  washed  the  wound  with  tepid  water  and  a  sponge. 
He  never  changed  the  dressings  oftener  than  he  could  help  (p.  87), 
but  he  was  careful  to  see  that  they  were  not  soiled,  whilst  his  experience 
with  simple  enemata  led  him  to  prefer  a  clyster  of  salt  and  water 
to  the  powerful  purgatives  in  ordinary  use.  Some  of  his  patients 
recovered,  therefore,  and  he  was  not  slow  to  advertise  the  fact ;  but 
the  weight  of  authority  was  against  him,  and  in  spite  of  his  success, 
surgeons  preferred  to  mundify  their  wounds  and  use  incarnatives  for 
nearly  five  hundred  years  after  his  death. 
THE  MASTER  SURGEONS. 
The  position  which  Arderne  occupied  was  perfectly  well  recognized 
both  in  England  and  France,  and  was  identical  with  that  which  we 
occupy  at  the  present  time  as  consulting  and  operating  surgeons.  In 
France  such  surgeons  were  known  in  Arderne's  time  as  surgeons  of  the 


Forewords.  xix 
long  robe,  to  distinguish  them  from  the  barbers  practising  surgery, 
who  were  surgeons  of  the  short  robe.  In  England  the  prefix  of 
Master  indicated  the  difference,  and  John  Arderne  is  careful  therefore 
always  to  style  himself  Magister  Johannes  de  Arderne,  Magister  being 
his  title  as  Master  of  Surgery,  which  distinguished  him,  on  the  one 
hand,  from  the  Doctor  of  Physic  who  was  his  superior,  and,  on  the 
other,  from  the  Barber  and  the  Apothecary  who  ranked  below  him. 
The  Master  Surgeons  formed  a  small  guild  in  London  from  very  early 
times,  and  records  of  persons  entrusted  with  its  supervision  are  known 
as  early  as  1369. l  Arderne  calls  himself  "cirurgorum  minimus"  (p.  x, 
note  6),  and  he  was  probably  admitted  a  member  of  this  guild  when 
he  came  to  London  in  1370,  in  which  case  Master  John  Dunheued, 
Master  John  Hyndstoke  and  Master  Nicholas  Kildesby  would  be 
three  of  his  colleagues.  The  guild  never  contained  many  members,  but 
what  it  lacked  in  numbers  it  made  up  in  influence,  and,  in  spite  of 
many  struggles  with  the  more  numerous  Guild  of  Barbers,  it  was  able 
to  hold  its  own  for  many  years.  The  Guild  of  Surgeons  united  for  a 
short  time  with  the  Physicians  about  1423,  and  finally  became  merged 
into  the  United  Company  of  Barbers  and  Surgeons  in  1540.  But 
it  is  unnecessary  to  trace  the  growth  and  development  of  the  Guild  of 
Surgeons,  and  those  who  are  interested  in  it  will  find  a  fuller  account 
in  "  The  Medical  Magazine  "  for  1899.  The  present  treatise  contains 
slight  references  to  the  struggle  which  was  going  on  between  the 
Surgeons  and  the  Barbers  at  the  time  it  was  written.  There  is  the 
case,  for  instance  (p.  100),  of  the  rich  fishmonger  who  had  a  lacerated 
wound  of  the  arm  which  was  made  worse  by  the  incompetent  treat- 
ment of  a  barber  who  had  stuffed  it  with  corrosive  dressings.  Arderne 
tore  off  the  dressings  and  replaced  them  by  a  soothing  fomentation 
which  allowed  the  patient  to  have  a  good  night's  rest. 
But  the  human  interest  of  the  treatises  here  published  is  concen- 
trated in  Arderne's  description  of  the  qualities  required  in  a  good 
surgeon  (p.  4).  It  sets  forth  his  ideal  of  the  morals  and  etiquette  of 
the  highest  class  of  surgeons — the  Masters  of  Surgery — during  the 
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  and  shows  that  it  was  at  least  as 
high  as  it  is  amongst  the  best  men  of  the  present  day.  Pity,  charity, 
continence  in  all  things,  the  patient  first  but  the  fee  not  unimportant, 
because  then  as  now  the  labourer  was  worthy  of  his  hire,  were  the 
distinguishing  characteristics  of  the  educated  surgeon. 
Henri  de  Mondeville  gives  similar  rules  in  somewhat  greater  detail. 
1  South  'a  "Craft  of  Surgery,"  p.  17.     Messrs.  Cassell  &  Co.,  London,  1886. 


xx  Forewords. 
I  quote  partly  from  Prof.  E.  Nicaise's  splendid  edition  of  his  works,1 
and  partly  from  the  contemporary  translation  into  French,  published 
by  Dr.  A.  Bos  : 2  "  A  Surgeon  ought  to  be  fairly  bold.  He  ought  not 
to  quarrel  before  the  laity,  and  although  he  should  operate  wisely  and 
prudently,  he  should  never  undertake  any  dangerous  operation  unless 
he  is  sure  that  it  is  the  only  way  to  avoid  a  greater  danger.  His  limbs, 
and  especially  his  hands,  should  be  well-shaped  with  long,  delicate  and 
supple  fingers  which  must  not  be  tremulous.  He  ought  to  promise  a 
cure  to  every  patient,  but  he  should  tell  the  parents  or  the  friends  if 
there  is  any  danger.  He  should  refuse  as  far  as  possible  all  difficult 
cases,  and  he  should  never  mix  himself  up  with  desperate  ones.  He 
may  give  advice  to  the  poor  for  the  love  of  God  only,  but  the  wealthy 
should  be  made  to  pay  well.  He  should  neither  praise  himself  nor 
blame  others,  and  he  should  not  hate  any  of  his  colleagues.  He 
ought  to  sympathise  with  his  patients  in  their  distress  and  fall  in  with 
their  lawful  requests  so  far  as  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  treat- 
ment. Patients,  on  the  other  hand,  should  obey  their  surgeons  im- 
plicitly in  everything  appertaining  to  their  cure.  The  surgeon's 
assistants  must  be  loyal  to  their  surgeon  and  friendly  to  his  patients. 
They  should  not  tell  the  patient  what  the  surgeon  said  unless  the 
news  is  pleasant,  and  they  should  always  appear  cheerful.  They 
must  agree  amongst  themselves  as  well  as  with  the  patients,  and  they 
must  not  be  always  grumbling,  because  this  inspires  fear  and  doubt  in 
the  patient." 
De  Mondeville  then  shows  how  an  honest  surgeon  may  be  replaced 
and  damaged  by  one  Avho  is  less  conscientious,  for  he  says :  "  A  rich 
man  has  the  beginning  of  an  inflammation.  He  calls  in  an  upright 
surgeon,  who  says  after  examining  him,  '  Seigneur,  there  is  no  need 
for  any  operation  here,  because  nature  will  relieve  herself,  etc. ;  but  if 
the  inflammation  gets  worse,  send  for  me.'  It  then  happens  that  the 
patient  calls  in  another  man  who  is  a  quack,  and  he  is  told,  '  Seigneur, 
you  have  a  great  deal  of  inflammation,  I  can  feel  it  inside,  and  if  you 
are  not  treated  at  once  you  will  certainly  regret  it.'  This  surgeon 
then  sets  to  work  and  makes  an  inflammation,  which  he  afterwards 
cures,  so  that  the  whole  proceeding  redounds  to  his  credit  and  profit, 
for  he  discovered  an  inflammation  which  did  not  exist,  whilst  the 
first  surgeon  is  damaged  both  in  his  reputation  and  his  pocket  because 
he  did  not  find  out  what  was  not  there." 
1  "  Chirurgie  de  Maitre  Henri  de  Mondeville,  composed  de  1306  h  1320,"  par Ed.  Nicaise.     Paris,  1893,  pp.  91  et  aeqq. 
2  "  Soc.  des  Anciens  Textes  Fran^ais."     Paris,  1897,  tome  i,  p.  140. 


Forewords.  xxi 
"  Then  again,  one  of  these  second-rate  surgeons  will  come  to  a  sick 
man  who  is  wealthy,  and  will  say  to  him,  with  the  voice  of  an  arch- 
angel— taking  care  that  no  witnesses  are  present — '  Seigneur,  you 
must  remember  that  you  are  the  one  who  is  ill  and  in  pain.  It  is  not 
your  son  or  your  nephew.  It  is  you  who  are  kept  awake  by  the  pain 
whilst  your  friends  and  servants  sleep.  Others  won't  take  care  of  you 
if  you  don't  take  care  of  yourself.  You  are  rich  enough  to  get  advice 
and  to  buy  health  and  whatever  else  you  want  if  you  choose  to  do  so. 
Riches  are  not  more  than  health,  nor  is  poverty  worse  than  sickness. 
Have  you  not  made  the  greater  part  of  your  money  yourself  and  for 
yourself,  so  that  if  you  are  not  a  miser  you  can  apply  it  to  relieve 
your  wants  ?  Would  to  God  that  those  who  look  after  you  so  badly 
had  your  complaint.  But  all  this  is  between  ourselves,  and  what  I 
tell  you  is  only  out  of  pity  for  you  and  for  your  good.'  Then,  in  the 
absence  of  the  patient,  he  speaks  to  the  relatives  and  says, '  Seigneurs, 
this  man  has  the  greatest  confidence  in  you,  and,  truly,  if  you  lose 
him,  you  will  lose  an  excellent  friend.  It  is  not  to  your  credit  either 
to  let  him  go  without  advice,  for  if  he  died  without  advice  you  would 
be  blamed  everlastingly,  even  if  it  made  him  as  poor  as  Job.  He  is 
really  in  great  danger,  and  it  is  a  serious  case,  but  nature  sometimes 
does  better  than  we  have  any  right  to  expect.  He  is  sure  to  die  if  no 
one  treats  him,  but  if  he  is  properly  treated  it  is  just  possible  that  he 
will  escape  and  not  die.  If  he  dies  it  won't  be  the  result  of  the  treat- 
ment, because  he  is  nearly  dead  already,  his  only  chance  is  to  have  a 
consultation,  etc.  I  am  speaking  to  you  as  a  friend  and  not  as  a  doctor.' 
"  But  it  is  quite  another  matter  when  this  same  surgeon  has  to 
treat  a  poor  man,  for  he  says,  '  I  am  really  sorry  for  you,  and  I  would 
gladly  help  you  for  the  love  of  God  only.  But  I  am  very  busy 
just  now  with  a  lot  of  difficult  cases,  and,  besides,  the  season  is  not 
a  very  favourable  one  for  an  operation.  You  can't  afford  to  buy  what 
is  necessary  for  your  case,  such  as  drugs  and  dressings,  so  I  would  put 
it  off  until  the  summer.  You  will  then  be  able  to  get  the  herbs  and 
whatever  else  is  wanted  and  so  save  expense.  The  summer,  too,  is 
the  best  time  for  the  poor.'  When  the  same  pauper  comes  back  in 
the  summer  the  surgeon  says  to  him,  '  I  am  very  sorry  that  I  put  you 
off  in  the  winter  and  told  you  to  wait  until  the  summer,  because  the 
winter  is  really  the  best  time.  Summer  is  too  hot  and  there  is  a  fear 
of  stirring  up  the  disease.  I  should  advise  you  to  wait  until  the  hot 
weather  is  over.'  And  this  goes  on  everlastingly,  for  this  kind  of 
surgeon  never  finds  time  to  operate  upon  a  pauper." 


xxii  Forewords. 
De  Mondeville  classifies  his  patients  according  to  their  ability  to 
pay  fees.  "  The  first  class  are  paupers  who  must  be  treated  for  nothing ; 
the  second  class  are  a  little  better  off,  and  may  send  presents  of  fowls 
and  ducks;  they  pay  in  kind.  The  third  class  are  friends  and  rela- 
tions who  pay  no  fixed  fee,  but  send  victuals  or  presents  in  token  of 
gratitude,  but  no  money.  Our  assistants  ought  to  suggest  the  presents 
to  this  class,  saying  behind  our  backs,  and  as  if  we  knew  nothing  about 
it,  when  anything  is  said  about  money,  '  No,  indeed,  the  Master  would 
not  like  it,  and  you  would  do  much  better  to  make  him  a  little  present, 
though  I  am  sure  that  he  does  not  expect  anything.'  Indeed,  a  sharp 
assistant  sometimes  makes  more  by  such  suggestions  than  the  Master 
4oes  by  his  operation,  and  it  is  just  like  doubling  the  fee  on  account  of 
the  horse  when  the  Master  makes  his  visits  on  horseback.  Then  there 
is  a  class  embracing  those  who  are  notoriously  bad  payers,  such  as  our 
nobility  and  their  households,  government  officials,  judges,  baillies 
and  lawyers,  whom  we  are  obliged  to  treat  because  we  dare  not  offend 
them.  In  fact,  the  longer  we  treat  these  people  the  more  we  lose. 
It  is  best  to  cure  them  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  to  give  them  the 
best  medicines.  Lastly,  there  is  a  class  who  pay  in  full  and  in 
advance,  and  they  should  be  prevented  from  getting  ill  at  all,  because 
we  are  paid  a  salary  to  keep  them  in  health." 
The  difficulty  of  obtaining  payment  for  operations  in  the  fourteenth 
century  must  have  been  very  great,  for  De  Mondeville  still  further 
emphasizes  it  and  says,  "  The  chief  object  of  the  patient,  and  the  one 
idea  which  dominates  all  his  actions,  is  to  get  cured,  and  when  once 
he  is  cured  he  forgets  his  own  obligation  and  omits  to  pay;  the  object 
of  the  surgeon,  on  the  other  hand,  is  to  obtain  his  money,  and  he 
should  never  be  satisfied  with  a  promise  or  a  pledge,  but  he  should 
either  have  the  money  in  advance  or  take  a  bond  for  it.  As  the  poet 
says,  '  Stepe  fides  data  fallit,  plegius  plaidit,  vadium  valet — The 
promise  is  often  broken,  the  security  is  worthless,  the  bond  alone 
holds  good.'  "  De  Mondeville  also  thinks  that  it  is  better  on  the  whole 
for  the  surgeon  to  be  paid  for  what  he  does  rather  than  by  a  retaining 
fee,  because  a  salary  is  apt  to  make  him  so  hopeful  that  he  will  think 
the  blind  can  certainly  see  and  the  lame  can  walk  or  even  run.  The 
surgeon  too  must  beware  of  those  who  will  make  infamous  proposals 
to  him,  because  from  time  immemorial  it  has  been  an  article  of  faith 
with  the  common  people  that  every  surgeon  is  a  thief,  a  murderer  or  a 
swindler.  He  should  also  be  careful  to  estimate  the  strength  of  a 
patient  before  he  operates.  If  a  patient  dies  of  the  operation  and  not 
of  mere  weakness  the  surgeon  is  held  excused  so  long  as  the  friends 


Foi-ewords.  xxiii 
think  the  wound  looks  healthy,  but  if  the  wound  looks  badly  the 
surgeon  is  credited  with  the  death  even  though  the  patient  has  simply 
died  of  weakness.  The  surgeon  must  not  put  too  much  faith  in 
appearances.  The  rich  have  a  nasty  habit  of  coming  to  him  in  old 
clothes,  or,  if  they  are  properly  dressed  as  befits  their  station  they 
invent  all  kinds  of  excuses  for  beating  down  his  fees.  They  say 
Charity  is  a  flower  when  they  find  a  man  who  helps  the  poor,  and 
think  that  a  surgeon  ought  to  assist  the  unfortunate,  but  they  never 
consider  that  a  like  rule  is  binding  upon  them.  "I  often  say  to 
such  folk,"  De  Mondeville  adds,  "  Well,  then,  pay  me  for  yourself  and 
for  three  paupers  and  I  will  cure  them  as  well  as  you.  But  they 
never  make  any  answer,  and  I  have  never  yet  found  any  one  in  any 
position,  whether  he  was  a  cleric  or  a  layman,  who  was  rich  enough,  or 
rather  honest  enough,  to  pay  what  he  had  promised  until  he  was  made 
to  do  so."  Lesser  surgeons  must  have  fared  very  badly  if  this  was 
the  experience  of  the  surgeon  to  the  King  of  France. 
De  Mondeville  returns  to  the  question  of  fees  in  another  part  of 
his  book  (Nicaise,  op.  cit.  p.  199).  "The  surgeon  ought  to  consider 
three  things  when  a  patient  comes  to  see  him  and  arrange  about  the 
fee  for  an  operation.  First,  his  own  position ;  secondly,  the  condition 
of  the  patient ;  thirdly,  the  state  of  the  disease.  As  regards  himself 
the  surgeon  should  think  whether  he  is  celebrated  or  at  least  better 
known  than  his  colleagues,  whether  he  is  the  only  surgeon  in  the 
country,  whether  he  is  rich  and  not  obliged  to  practise,  whether  he 
has  enough  cases  to  fill  up  his  time,  and  whether  he  is  on  the  point  of 
undertaking  more  important  cases.  On  the  second  point,  viz.  the 
condition  of  the  patient.  He  either  knows  or  he  does  not  know  him  ; 
if  he  knows  him  he  is  aware  whether  he  is  rich  or  poor,  whether,  for 
example,  he  is  the  nephew  of  a  bishop  or  of  an  abbe.  But  if  he  does 
not  know  him  he  ought  to  make  careful  inquiries,  or  rather  he  ought 
to  get  his  assistants  to  make  them,  because  sometimes,  indeed  often,  it 
happens  that  the  rich  come  to  the  leech  dressed  like  paupers.  If  the 
surgeon  suspects  this  he  should  say  to  his  patient,  '  Seigneur,  I  have 
examined  your  case  but  I  must  think  it  over,  and  I  should  like  to  see 
you  again  when  I  have  done  so,  because  he  who  judges  in  haste  repents 
at  leisure,'  and  in  the  interval  the  surgeon  should  make  inquiries.  As 
to  the  third  point,  the  surgeon  should  think  of  the  disease  whether  it  is 
serious,  if  it  is  difficult  to  cure,  and  if  long  attendance  will  be  required, 
whether  few  people  know  how  to  treat  it,  if  it  is  chronic,  and  if  it 
presents  any  unusual  characters. 
"  When  the  surgeon  has  considered  all  the  points  under  these  three 


xxiv  Forewords. 
headings  he  ought  to  charge  the  patient  boldly  a  very  large  fee,  though 
he  may  moderate  it  according  to  circumstances.  To  a  rich  man  he 
should  say,  '  The  fee  a  surgeon  ought  to  receive  is  a  hundred  pounds  for 
this  operation,'  and  if  the  patient  is  staggered  by  the  sum  he  would 
continue, '  but  I  did  not  say  that  I  was  going  to  charge  you  that  amount,' 
and  thus  little  by  little  he  lowers  his  fee.  But  he  should  always  have 
a  minimum  for  each  operation  and  never  go  below  it.  In  such  cases 
it  is  more  graceful  for  him  to  say,  '  I  am  ready  to  do  this  operation  as 
you  and  your  friends  wish,  but  I  would  rather  do  it  for  nothing  to 
please  you  than  for  so  small  a  fee.'  And  the  surgeon  should  pretend 
that  he  has  no  living  (prebende)  nor  capital  except  his  profession,  and 
that  everything  is  as  dear  as  possible,  especially  drugs,  and  ointment ; 
that  the  fee  is  as  nothing  compared  with  his  services ;  and  the  wage& 
of  all  other  artisans,  masons,  for  example,  have  doubled  of  late.  I 
repeat  that  the  surgeon  ought  to  charge  the  rich  as  much  as  possible 
and  to  get  all  he  can  out  of  them,  provided  that  he  does  all  he  can  to- 
cure  the  poor.  You  then,  Surgeons,  if  you  operate  conscientiously 
upon  the  rich  for  a  sufficient  fee  and  upon  the  poor  for  charity,  you 
ought  not  to  fear  the  ravages  of  fire,  nor  of  rain  nor  of  wind  ;  you  need 
not  take  orders  or  make  pilgrimages  nor  undertake  any  work  of  that 
kind,  because  by  your  science  you  can  save  your  souls  alive,  live  with- 
out poverty  and  die  in  your  houses.  Live  in  peace  and  joy  and  rejoice 
because  your  recompense  is  so  great  in  heaven,  as  necessarily  follows 
from  the  words  of  the  Saviour,  spoken  in  the  psalm  by  the  mouth 
of  His  prophet,  '  Beatus  qui  intelligit  super  egeneum  et  pauperem.  .  .' 
For  this  reason  surgeons  enjoy  such  immunities  and  are  free  from  all 
personal  service  and  from  all  common  burdens,  such  as  the  repair  of 
walls,  moats  and  roads,  from  the  night  watch  in  towns,  and  from  all 
kinds  of  things.  The  Surgeons  are  classed  as  Surgeon-major  and  as 
Surgeons  of  the  palace  or  Examiners,  who  are  generally  called 
Archiatres  by  the  common  people." 
William  of  Salicet,  another  surgeon,  experienced  in  war  and  of  the 
same  high  standard  as  Arderne  and  De  Mondeville,  had  written  in 
1275  ("  Chirurgie  de  Guillaume  de  Salicet  Achevee  en  1275,  Traduction 
et  Commentaire,  par  Paul  Pifteau."  Toulouse,  1898,  p.  3)  in  somewhat 
similar  terms.  He  says  a  surgeon  should  grant  the  wishes  of  his 
patient  so  long  as  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  operation.  He  ought 
also  to  comfort  his  patient  as  far  as  possible  by  kind  actions  and  by 
soothing  words.  He  should  hold  out  hope  even  in  the  most  desperate 
cases,  because  the  patient's  courage  reacts  to  these  words  and  promises,. 


Forewords.  xxv 
and  they  may  have  a  more  powerful  influence  on  his  recovery  than 
any  of  the  surgeon's  remedies.  But  the  matter  should  be  discussed 
with  the  friends  whenever  there  is  danger,  partly  to  save  them  the 
shock  of  an  unexpected  death,  and  partly  to  protect  the  surgeon  from 
any  suspicion  of  having  caused  it.  Neither  a  surgeon  nor  a  physician 
should  talk  to  the  women  of  the  house  with  closed  doors,  whether  she 
be  mistress  or  servant.  He  should  never  speak  improperly  to  her,  nor 
make  eyes  at  her,  especially  in  the  presence  of  the  patient.  Such 
actions  may  cause  a  patient  to  lose  confidence  in  his  surgeon,  and  thus 
the  operation  may  prove  unsuccessful  because  the  patient  has  lost  the 
good  opinion  he  had  of  the  operator.  A  wise  surgeon  too  will  do  well 
to  refrain  from  stealing  anything  whilst  he  is  in  attendance ;  he  will 
not  stir  up  strife  amongst  the  patient's  friends  or  quarrel  with  the 
people  of  the  house  ;  he  will  be  careful,  too,  not  to  employ  notoriously 
bad  characters  as  his  assistants,  for  all  these  things  may  spoil  a  good 
operation  and  thus  detract  from  the  dignity  of  medicine.  Above 
all  things,  he  must  refrain  from  becoming  too  familiar  with  the  laity. 
They  are  always  ready  to  speak  ill  of  doctors,  and  too  great  familiarity 
merely  means  that  one  cannot  demand  the  proper  fees  for  an  operation 
with  any  assurance  and  safety.  It  is  well  known  that  a  large  fee 
increases  the  authority  of  the  doctor  as  well  as  the  confidence  the 
patient  puts  in  him,  even  though  the  doctor  is  very  ignorant,  because 
it  is  thought  that  a  large  fee  secures  better  attention.  The  surgeon 
ought  to  observe  the  rules  of  those  with  whom  he  is  living  or  amongst 
whom  he  finds  himself.  He  should  visit  the  poor  because  it  is  a  good 
thing  to  have  a  reputation  for  Charity,  partly  because  it  increases  his 
estimation  in  the  eyes  of  the  people,  and  partly  because  it  enables  the 
Divine  Power  to  extend  its  influence  over  his  spirit.  The  surgeon 
ought  not  to  allow  himself  to  be  swayed  by  the  entreaties  of  the 
patient,  because  if  he  yields  the  patient  will  lose  faith  in  the  operator, 
and  the  operator  may  himself  become  timid  and  hesitating.  The 
assistants  ought  to  be  amiable  and  helpful  to  the  patient,  and  they 
should  never  repeat  to  him  what  the  surgeon  has  said  unless  it  is 
pleasant  and  encouraging.  Leeches  should  be  especially  careful  not  to 
discuss  matters  with  the  patient  or  in  his  presence,  and  above  all 
things,  they  must  avoid  whispering  or  talking  together  in  corners,  for 
such  actions  rouse  all  kinds  of  suspicion  in  the  mind  of  the  patient 
and  his  friends. 
Lanfrank,  who  was  in  Paris  in  1295,  and  is  looked  upon  as  the 
founder  of  French  surgery,  says  in  the  English  version  transcribed  in 


xxvi  Fwewords. 
1380  (Early  English  Text  Society,  No.  102,  1894,  p.  8) :  "Needful 
it  is  that  a  surgeon  be  of  a  complexion  well  proportioned.  .  .  He 
must  have  hands  well  shaped,  long  small  fingers,  and  his  body  not 
quaking.  Also  he  must  be  of  subtle  wit,  for  all  things  that  (be)longeth 
to  surgery  may  not  with  letters  be  written.  .  .  Be  he  no  glutton,  nor 
not  envious  nor  a  niggard ;  be  he  true ;  humble  and  pleasingly  bear 
himself  to  his  patients ;  speak  he  no  ribaldry  in  the  sick  man's  house ; 
give  he  no  counsel  but  if  he  be  asked  ;  nor  speak  he  with  no  woman 
in  folly  in  the  man's  house ;  nor  chide  he  not  with  the  sick  man  nor 
none  of  his  household,  but  courteously  speak  to  the  sick  man,  and  in 
all  manner  of  sickness  promise  him  health  although  you  despair  of 
him,  but  nevertheless  tell  his  friends  the  truth.  Love  no  hard  cures 
and  undertake  no  desperate  cases.  Help  poor  men  as  far  as  possible 
and  ask  good  reward  of  the  rich.  Praise  he  not  himself  with  his  own 
mouth,  nor  blame  he  over  sharply  other  leeches.  Love  he  all  leeches 
and  clerics,  and,  as  far  as  possible,  make  he  no  leech  his  enemy.  So 
clothe  he  himself  with  virtue  that  he  may  obtain  a  good  name  and  a 
fair  reputation.  This  is  the  ethical  teaching." 
It  is  clear  from  these  extracts  that  Arderne  had  read  Lanfrank's 
rules  for  a  surgeon,  and  that  he  amplified  them  from  his  own  ex- 
perience, which  corresponded  very  much  with  that  of  the  French 
surgeons  who  were  his  contemporaries.  But  Arderne's  teaching  of  the 
duties  of  a  surgeon  compares  very  favourably  with  that  of  William 
Salicet  or  Henri  de  Mondeville.  He  had  a  higher  moral  tone,  or,  at 
any  rate,  he  based  his  warnings  on  morality  rather  than  upon  self- 
interest,  and  there  is  nowhere  any  reference  to  a  surgeon  as  a  common 
thief.  His  fees  are  high,  but,  as  a  contemporary  writer  explains,  this 
is  to  make  up  for  the  long  periods  when  he  had  nothing  to  do,  and  it 
is  clear  that  it  was  extremely  difficult  to  obtain  money  from  patients. 
Every  surgeon  was  taught  never  to  treat  cases  which  appeared 
incurable  or  were  unlikely  to  run  a  straightforward  course.  This  was 
due  to  ignorance,  to  the  weakness  of  the  law,  and  to  the  arbitrary  treat- 
ment to  which  individuals  might  be  exposed.  Throughout  the  Middle 
Ages,  and  long  afterwards,  there  was  no  science  of  toxicology  and  very 
little  knowledge  of  morbid  anatomy.  Persons  who  died  suddenly,  there- 
fore, were  usually  thought  to  have  been  killed  by  poison,  and  the  his- 
tories of  the  present  day  are  full  of  accounts  of  the  deaths  of  great  men 
who  are  said  to  have  been  poisoned,  when  it  is  clear  to  every  medical 
reader  that  they  died  a  natural  death  from  some  acute  disease.  A 
perforated  gastric  ulcer,  a  perforated  duodenal  ulcer,  an  acute  gan- 


Forewords.  xxvii 
grenous  inflammation  of  the  vermiform  appendix  would  present  all  the 
characters  of  poisoning  to  the  lay  mind.  Failure  after  an  operation 
was  liable  to  be  followed  by  the  most  undesirable  consequences  to  the 
leech.  King  John  of  Bohemia,  from  whose  body  Edward  the  Black 
Prince  took  an  ostrich  feather  for  his  crest,  sewed  up  his  French  leech 
in  a  sack  and  threw  him  into  the  Oder  because  he  had  not  cured  his 
cataract  as  he  had  promised. 
Arderne  must  have  led  an  interesting  and  adventurous  life,  and 
his  treatises  contain  many  sidelights  on  contemporary  events.  He 
appears  to  be  the  only  contemporary  authority  for  the  story  of  the 
means  by  which  Edward  the  Black  Prince  obtained  the  ostrich 
feather  which  has  since  become  the  cognisance  of  the  heir  apparent  to 
the  English  throne.  The  passage  runs  as  follows,  "  We  are  not  able 
to  cure  rhagades  unless  the  remedy  can  be  put  through  the  anus 
either  as  a  clyster  or  by  means  of  a  suppository,  since  remedies  applied 
outside  are  either  useless  or  do  very  little  good.  We  ought,  therefore, 
to  work  with  stimulating  applications  until  the  wound  is  clean,  and 
afterwards  with  applications  which  both  heal  and  dry,  as  has  been 
said  already  in  the  chapter  on  internal  piles,  to  wit,  where  Nastar  is 
painted — and  Nastar  is  a  kind  of  clyster  or  enema  known  as  a  glister- 
pipe. — The  feather  of  the  Prince  of  Wales  is  also  shown  there,  viz.  on 
the  preceding  page.  And  note  that  Edward  the  eldest  son  of  Edward 
King  of  England  bore  a  similar  feather  above  his  crest,  and  he 
obtained  the  feather  from  the  King  of  Bohemia,  whom  he  killed  at 
Cressy  in  France.  And  so  he  took  the  feather  which  is  called  an 
'  ostrich  feather,'  which  that  most  noble  Lord  King  had  used  hitherto 
to  bear  above  his  crest.  And  in  that  year  when  our  Lord  the 
strenuous  and  warlike  Prince  departed  to  God,  I  wrote  this  little 
book  of  mine  with  my  own  hand,  viz.  in  the  year  "one  thousand  three 
hundred  and  seventy-six.  And  our  Lord  Edward  the  Prince  died  on 
the  sixth  June  on  Trinity  Sunday  at  Westminster  during  the  great 
Parliament,  and  may  God  assoil  him,  for  he  was  the  very  flower  of 
chivalry,  without  peer  in  the  world." l 
1  "Rhagades  curare  non  possumus  nisi  medicinis  infra  anum  inferamus  aut in  clystere  aut  niodo  suppositorii  quia  medicinse  exterius  appositse  parura  vel 
nihil  prosunt,  unde  primo  oportet  cum  corrosivis  operare  ad  mundificationem  et 
postea  cum  consolidantibus  et  desiccantibus  ut  prajdiotum  est  capitulo  de  haemor- 
rhoid.  infra  anum  latentibus  ubi  nastare  depingitur  et  penna  Principis  Wallire, 
viz.  folio  praecedente.  Et  nota  quod  talem  pennaiu  albam  portabat  Kdwardus 
primogenitus  filius  Edwardi  Regis  Anglire,  super  crestam  suam.  Et  illam 
pennam  conquisivit  de  rege  Boe'mo,  quern  interfecit  apud  Cresse  in  Francia.  Et 
sic  assumpsit  sibi  illam  pennam  quse  dicitur  '  Ostrich  fether,'  quam  prius Dominus  Rex  nobillissimus  portebat  super  crestain  suam  et  eodem  anno  quo 


xxviii  Forewords. 
This  passage  is  omitted  from  the  English  translation  which  is 
here  printed  (Sloane  6),  as  well  as  from  the  later  and  different  English 
translation  (Sloane  76),  which  are  often  merely  abstracts  of  what 
Arderne  wrote.  But  it  is  present  in  the  Latin  texts  (Sloane  MSS.  56, 
leaf  74;  335,  leaf  68;  2002,  leaf  333;  176,  back;  29301,  leaf  42, 
col.  157  ;  in  MS.  1153,  leaf  41,  in  Trin.  Coll.  Camb. ;  and  in  the  MS. 
No.  339  in  the  Hunterian  Library  at  Glasgow,  leaf  77). 
It  was  from  the  last  MS.,  which  was  then  called  Sloane  2,  that 
Thomas  Hearn  copied  it  in  the  "  Chronici  Walteri  Hemingford."  l 
In  each  case  it  is  a  part  of  the  text,  and  is  written  by  the  same  hand 
as  the  rest  of  the  manuscript.  The  scribes  have  not  copied  from  each 
other,  and  there  is  very  little  doubt  in  my  own  mind  that  Arderne 
wrote  it  originally,  and  that  it  contains  the  story  current  in  his  day 
about  the  source  of  the  feather,  and  Arderne  was  in  a  position  to 
obtain  the  story  at  first  hand.  Incidentally  it  bears  out  an  interesting 
point,  for  it  says  that  both  the  King  of  Bohemia  and  the  Prince  of 
Wales  bore  the  feather  above  his  crest,  not  as  his  crest,  so  that  it  was 
used  in  exactly  the  same  manner  as  was  the  Garter  at  first,  viz.  as  an 
ornament  to  be  worn  at  jousts  or  tournaments.2  It  only  became  a 
crest  in  later  years,  and  so  long  as  it  was  a  mere  ornament  or  dis- 
tinguishing badge  there  was  no  need  for  it  to  be  associated  with  a 
motto ;  indeed,  in  each  of  Arderne's  figures  the  scroll  placed  upon  the 
quill  of  the  feather,  which  is  single,  is  left  blank  instead  of  being 
charged.  This  use  of  the  ostrich  feather  as  an  ornament  at  jousts 
further  explains  the  passage  in  the  Black  Prince's  will,  in  which  he 
desired  that  his  corpse  should  bo  taken  through  the  City  of  Canterbury 
as  far  as  the  Priory,  and  that  "  two  war  horses,  covered  with  our 
Arms  and  two  men  armed  in  our  Arms  and  in  our  crests,"  should 
precede  his  corpse ;  that  is  to  say,  "  the  one  for  War,  with  our  entire 
Arms  quarterly,  and  the  other  for  Peace,  with  our  Badge  of  Ostrich 
Feathers,"  with  four  banners  of  the  same  suite.3 
Dominus  strenuus  et  bellicosus  Princeps  migravit  at  Dominum,  scrips!  libellum 
istum  manu  propria,  viz.  anno  Millesimo  ccclxxvi.  Et  Dominus  Edwardus  prin- 
ceps  obiit  vi  Idus  Junii,  viz.  die  Sanctse  Trinitatis,  apud  Westmonasterium  in 
magno  parliarnento,  quern  Deus  absolvat,  quia  fuit  flos  Milicise  Mundi  sino  pare. 
Nastare  species  est  clysteris  sive  enernatis  'a  glister  pipe.'  " 1  Vol.  2,  pp.  444,  446,  in  note. 
2  ' '  Observations  on  the  Institution  of  the  Most  Noble  Order  of  the  Garter,  by 
Sir  Nicholas  Harris  Nicolas."     "Archaeologia,''  vol.  31,  p.  130. 
3  "On  the  Badge  and  Mottoes  of  the  Prince  of  Wales,"  vol.  3.    "Archaeologia," vol.  31,  p.  356. 
"Et  volons  qe  a  quele  heure  qe  uotre  corps  soit  anienez  parmy  la  ville  de 
Cantirbirie  tantq  a  la  priorie,  q'denx  destrej  covertj  de  nos  armej,  et  deu3  home} 


Forewords.  xxix 
The  directions  for  making  Nerbone  plaister  (p.  91)  show  the 
difficulties  in  reckoning  small  subdivisions  of  time.  Arderne  directs 
that  the  melted  diachylon  should  be  allowed  to  stand  without  moving 
by  the  space  of  a  "  pater  noster "  and  an  "  ave  maria."  I  asked 
a  patient  recently,  the  Mother  Superior  of  a  Convent,  how  long 
it  would  take  to  repeat  these  prayers,  and  she  replied  about  three 
quarters  of  a  minute.  When  I  next  saw  her,  after  she  had  spent  a 
sleepless  night  with  a  clock  in  front  of  her,  she  said  that  the  question 
had  interested  her,  and  she  found  that  a  pater  and  an  ave  took  exactly 
half  a  minute.  Dr.  Norman  Moore  draws  attention  ("  The  Progress 
of  Medicine  at  St.  Bartholomew's  Hospital,"  1888,  p.  13)  to  a  similar 
method  employed  by  John  Mirfeld,  a  Canon  of  the  priory  of  St. 
Bartholomew,  who  wrote  a  general  treatise  on  medicine — Breviarium 
Bartholomei — about  the  year  1380.  He  says,  "  Mirfeld  treated 
chronic  rheumatism  by  rubbing  the  part  with  olive  oil.  This  was  to 
be  prepared  with  ceremony.  It  was  to  be  put  into  a  clean  vessel 
while  the  preparer  made  the  sign  of  the  cross  and  said  the  Lord's 
Prayer  and  an  Ave  Maria,  and  when  the  vessel  was  put  to  the  fire  the 
Psalm,  'Why  do  the  heathen  rage,'  was  to  be  said  as  far  as  the 
verse  'Desire  of  me,  and  I  shall  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine 
inheritance.'  The  Gloria,  Pater  Noster,  and  Ave  Maria  are  to  be 
said,  and  the  whole  gone  through  seven  times.  '  Which  done  let 
that  oil  be  kept.' "  .  .  .  "  The  time  occupied  I  have  tried,"  says  Dr. 
Norman  Moore,  "  and  found  to  be  a  quarter  of  an  hour." 
The  charm  against  Cramp  (p.  102)  was  obtained  from  one  who 
was  at*  Milan  when  Lionel,  Duke  of  Clarence,  married  Violante, 
the  daughter  of  Galeazzo  Visconti,  at  the  door  of  the  Cathedral,  on 
June  5th,  1368.  Five  months  of  continuous  jousts,  feasts  and  revels 
were  followed  by  the  inevitable  consequences  of  delirium  tremens  and 
epileptiform  convulsions. 
The  sober  testimony  to  the  profligacy  of  the  times  given  in  the 
receipt  for  making  confection  of  Sanguis  Veneris  (p.  89)  is  the  natural 
outcome  of  the  conditions  described  in  Dr.  Furnivall's  "  Early  English 
Meals  and  Manners"  (Early  English  Text  Society,  Original  Series, 
No.  32).  The  boys  and  girls  of  the  upper  classes  were  transferred 
arme?  en  nos  armej  et  en  nos  heaumes  voisent  devant  dit  n're  corps,  c'est  assavoir 
1'un  pur  la  guerre  de  noj  arme3  entiers  quartellej,  at  1'autre  pur  la  paix  de  noz 
bages  des  plumes  d'ostrace,  ove  quarter  baneres  de  mesme  la  sute,  et  qe  chacun 
de  ceaux  q'porteront  les  dite$  baneres  ait  sur  sa  teste  un  chapeau  de  noj  armes." 
"Nichols's  Royal  Wills,"  p.  68.  See  also  "  Notes  and  Queries,"  Series  ii,  1861, vol.  xi,  pp.  224  and  294. 


xxx  Forewords. 
.from  their  own  homes  to  be  educated  in  the  houses  of  the  nobility  as 
pages  and  maids  of  honour.  They  were  well  fed,  spent  their  lives 
in  a  round  of  pleasure,  and  were  often  badly  looked  after. 
The  account  of  juniper  shows  that  Arderne  knew  London  and  its 
neighbourhood  and  talked  with  the  countryfolk  as  he  went  amongst 
them.  He  says,  "  Juniper  grows  in  Kent  upon  Shooter's  Hill  on  the 
road  to  Canterbury,  at  Dorking  also  in  Surrey  as  well  as  in  many 
other  places  in  that  County,  at  Bedington  too  near  Croydon,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  that  country  call  it  gorst  because  they  do  not  know  its 
proper  name."  l  The  Black  Death  does  not  seem  to  have  left  much 
impression  upon  Arderne's  mind,  because,  like  most  contemporary 
medical  writers,  he  only  mentions  it  incidentally,  and  what  we  look 
upon  as  an  appalling  visitation  had  already  faded  from  his  mind, 
and  its  impression  had  been  replaced  by  more  recent  epidemics. 
Arderne  lived  through  the  most  chivalrous  period  of  English 
history,  and  in  all  probability  he  knew  personally  many  of  the  peerless 
knights  and  splendid  champions  who  survive  for  ever  in  the  pages  of 
Froissart.  To  have  known  such  men  was  in  itself  an  education,  and 
,to  have  lived  in  the  household  of  Henry,  Duke  of  Lancaster,  and  of 
John  of  Gaunt  was  sufficient  to  make  Arderne  the  best  type  of  an 
English  surgeon — a  scholar  and  a  gentleman.  The  chivalry  of  the 
age  is  well  brought  out  in  the  extant  manuscripts  of  Arderne's 
treatises.  In  some  cases  he  mentions  the  names  of  the  patients,  but 
in  many  instances  he  tricks  their  coat-armour  instead  of  giving  names, 
and  thus  some  early  shields  are  preserved,  amongst  others  that  of  the 
great  Douglas. 
Arderne  left  a  few  traces  on  the  sands  of  time,  but  very  few. 
Johannis  Argentin,  a  physician  at  Cambridge,  wrote  a  treatise,  which 
still  remains  in  the  Bodleian  Library  as  Ashmol.  MS.  No.  1437. 
Tanner2  thinks  that  it  was  written  about  1476.  He  mentions 
Arderne  no  less  than  eleven  times,  and  copies  his  style,  especially  his 
manner  of  quoting  cases  in  illustration  of  his  various  subjects. 
Arderne's  fame  as  a  pharmacist  long  outlasted  his  reputation  as  a 
surgeon.  Tapsimel  (p.  31),  Pulvis  sine  pari  (pp.  26  and  86),  Tapsi- 
valencia  (p.  69),  and  the  valences  of  Scabious  and  Wormwood  (p.  97), 
1  "Et  crescat  in  cancia  super  Scheteres  hylde  in  via  versus  cantuariam,  apud Dorkyng,  eciam  in  So)>eray  et  eciam  in  aliis  pluribus  illius  provincie,  crescit 
eciam  apud  Bedyngton  mxta  Croyden  quam  incole  patrie  illius  vocant  gorst,  quia 
proprium  nonien  illius  ignorant."     (MS.  Digby  161,  leaf  23,  in  the   Bodleian Library,  Oxford.) 
2  "Bibliotheca,"  p.  48. 


Forewords.  xxxi 
remained   until   the   time   of   the   first   Pharmacopoeia,    1618.      Dr. 
Alleyne1  speaks  thus  of  them: — 
"Powers  of  Scabious,  Valentia  Scabiosce. — Take  of  the  juice  of 
green  Scabious,  pressed  out  and  strained  through  a  cloth,  and  of 
Hog's  lard  cleared  of  its  membranes,  each  as  much  as  you  please. 
Let  the  Lard  be  beat  in  a  stone  mortar,  and  the  juice  poured  in  by 
little  at  a  time,  for  the  conveniency  of  mixture,  and  giving  its 
tincture ;  and  then  put  them  together  into  a  proper  vessel,  to  be 
exposed  to  the  sun,  and  so  that  the  juice  may  cover  the  lard ;  after 
nine  days  put  them  again  into  the  mortar  as  before,  and  throw  away 
that  thin  and  discoloured  humidity,  which  separates  upon  beating, 
without  rubbing  them  together;  and  again  put  into  its  vessel  for  five 
days.  And  afterwards  beat  it  again  and  by  little  at  a  time,  mix  with 
it  fresh  juice  of  scabious,  and  after  a  fresh  insolation  of  fifteen  days 
in  its  proper  vessel  in  the  Sun,  let  it  be  cleared  as  before  of  its  watery 
humidity.  Let  it  then  stand  again  in  the  same  manner  for  fifteen 
days  longer  with  fresh  juice,  and  after  a  little  beating  let  it  be  kept 
for  use  in  a  glass  or  earthen  vessel.  This,  we  are  told  by  the  first 
compilers  of  the  College  Dispensatory,  was  the  contrivance  of  John 
Arden,  an  experienced  surgeon  at  Newark  in  Nottinghamshire,  who 
lived  in  the  reign  of  Edward  III.  After  insertion  of  this,  which  they 
had  from  an  ancient  manuscript,  they  particularly  direct  to  repeat  the 
processes  with  fresh  juice  till  the  Lard  looks  of  a  deep  green ;  and 
that  is  made  the  measure  of  the  repetition  necessary.  The  powers 
and  honey  of  Mullein  were  from  the  same  author,  and  almost  three 
hundred  years  ago  were  in  great  esteem  amongst  the  surgeons  of  our 
own  country,  though  they  have  now  been  long  in  disuse." 
"  The  Powers  of  Mullein  ;  Tapsi  Valentia. — Take  of  the  juice  of 
Mullen  and  of  Hog's  lard,  each  as  much  as  you  please ;  let  the  Lard 
be  cleansed  of  its  membranes  and  fibresj  and  broke  into  small  parcels ; 
then  beat  it  with  the  expressed  juice,  press  out  and  strain  as  directed 
in  the  preceding  process.  Let  it  afterwards  be  put  into  a  proper 
vessel  for  nine  or  ten  days,  and  then  be  twice  more  impregnated  with 
fresh  juice  until  it  is  quite  green.  Lastly,  after  all  the  humidity  that 
will  separate  is  poured  off,  beat  it  again  briskly,  and  put  it  by  in  a 
proper  manner  for  use." 
The  first  contriver  of  these  processes,  as  appears  from  the  first 
edition  of  the  College  Dispensatory,  directs  the  medicines  thus  made 
to  be  fresh  beat  once  in  a  month. 
1  "A  New  English  Dispensatory,"  1733,  p.  336. ARDERNE,  C 


xxxii  Forewords. 
"Honey  of  Mullen;  Tapsimel. — Take  of  the  juice  of  Celandine 
and  one  part  Mullen,  of  despumated  Honey  two  parts ;  boil  gradually 
till  the  juices  are  evaporated,  adding  thereto,  if  the  Operator  pleases, 
calcined  Vitriol  and  Alum  with  Copperas,  and  again  boil  secundum 
artem." The  first  College  Dispensatory  adds  from  the  Author,  that  "  if 
occasion  requires  this  should  be  at  last  boiled  up  to  a  pretty  thick 
consistence ;  and  says  that  it  will  certainly  cure  itchings  in  any  part 
of  the  body,  and  is  a  most  noble  ointment.  But  it  seems  the  present 
Practice  hath  not  faith  enough  to  rely  upon  it  for  anything,  for 
neither  this  nor  the  foregoing  are  ever  prescribed  or  made.  However, 
it  hath  been  thought  fit  to  continue  such  extraordinary  discoveries 
still  upon  record  for  the  sake  of  any  that  may  think  proper  to  make 
trial  with  them." 
It  is  my  pleasant  duty,  in  conclusion,  to  thank  those  who  have 
given  me  much  help  in  the  preparation  of  this  volume.  First,  to  Dr. 
Warner,  the  Keeper  of  Manuscripts,  who  allowed  me  to  study  the 
Sloane  MSS.  at  the  British  Museum  in  comfort  in  the  room  which  is 
doing  duty  as  the  large  room;  secondly,  to  Mr.  L.  Galbraith,  who 
afforded  me  similar  facilities  in  the  University  Library  at  Glasgow ; 
and,  lastly,  to  Mr.  Falconer  Madan,  who  made  me  feel  at  home  in  the 
Bodleian.  Lieut.-Col.  Walter  D.  M°Caw,  Surgeon  of  the  United 
States  Army,  responded  kindly,  promptly  and  fully  to  my  questions 
about  the  only  manuscript  of  Arderne  which  Dr.  Harvey  Gushing  of 
Baltimore  has  been  able  to  obtain  tidings  of  in  America.  Miss 
Evaline  G.  Parker  at  Oxford,  and  Miss  Margaret  E.  Thompson  in 
London,  have  helped  me  by  transcribing  obscure  passages  which  I 
Avas  quite  unable  to  decipher ;  whilst  my  friend,  Mr.  J.  H.  ISToble,  has 
assisted  me  with  the  heraldry  of  the  various  MSS.,  a  subject  of  much 
interest,  which  I  hope  some  day  to  consider  in  greater  detail.  My 
obligations  to  Mr.  S.  Armitage-Smith  are  great  ;  and  I  have 
endeavoured  to  show  my  appreciation  of  the  interest  which  Dr.  Frank 
Payne  has  always  taken  in  Arderne,  and  the  help  I  have  received  by 
dedicating  to  him  this  edition  of  his  treatises.  I  have  tried  to  make 
the  text  literally  accurate,  and  to  elucidate  it  by  such  notes  as  were 
needed  to  explain  to  myself  the  various  difficulties  which  occurred  in 
reading  it.  No  one  can  be  more  conscious  of  the  defects  in  the  notes 
than  myself,  but  the  work  has  been  a  labour  of  love,  and  if  they 


Bibliography.  xxxiii 
seem  extremely  had  it  must  be  remembered  that,  after  all,  I  am  but 
a  surgeon,  whose  business  in  life  is  to  act  and  not  to  write. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY. 
The  following  table  shows  the  manuscripts  which  I  have  examined 
personally  at  the  British  Museum,  and  in  Oxford,  Cambridge  and 
Glasgow.  There  is  said  to  be  a  French  version  in  Paris  and  a  Latin 
one  at  Stockholm,  but  I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  obtain  any  informa- 
tion about  them :  there  is  a  manuscript  in  Washington  and  another 
in  Dublin. 
Arderne  issued  his  writings  in  the  form  of  treatises,  written  in 
Latin,  and  with  his  own  hand.  These  treatises  were  afterwards 
collected  and  were  sometimes  translated.  The  manuscripts  therefore 
contain  different  combinations.  The  collection  here  printed  is  one 
of  the  more  usual  groups,  but  the  translator  has  not  rendered  the 
whole  of  the  last  part  on  the  preparation  of  various  remedies.  It 
is  given  in  greater  detail  in  the  Ashmole  MS.  1434  in  the  Bodleian 
Library. 


MANUSCRIPTS  OF  JOHN  OF  ARDERNE  IN  THE 
VARIOUS  LIBRARIES. 
I.  PRACTICA  DE  FISTULA  IN -AND,  &c. 
Scec.  xiv.  Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  341,  ff.  41-69  b. 
„  „  „  No.  3844,  ff.  2-16  b. 
„  „  „  No.  3548,  ff.  65-88. 
„  University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  339. 
Scec.  xiv-xv.     University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  112,  ff.  38-98. 
„  Surgeon-General's  Lib..  Washington,  U.S.A.,  ff.41-138. 
Scec.  xv.    Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  6,  ff.  141-154  b.  [English]. 
„  No.  76,  ff.  143  and  144.  [English]. 
„  No.  238,  ff.  99-214. No.  277,  ff.  60b.-75b.  [English]. 
„  No.  347,  ff.  122-240. No.  563,  ff.  63-121  b.  [English]. 
„  No.  795,  ff.  96b.-163b. 
.,  No.  2002,  ff.  1-180. 
„  No.  2122,  ff.  10-32. 
„  No.  29301,  ff.  22-32  b. 
„  No.  8093,  ff.  140-174  [English]. 
Harleian  MSS.  No.  3371,  ff.  13-39  b. 
„  No.  5401,  ff.  34b.-52. 
University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  251,  formerly  Sloane  2. 
Bodley's- Library,  Oxford,  Ash.  1434,  ff.  11-107. 
St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  No.  132,  ff.  68. Emmanuel  Coll.,  Cambridge,  No.  69. 
Royal  College  of  Surgeons,  Ireland. 
Scec.  xvi.     Bodley's  Library,  Oxford,  Ash.  829,  ff.  76-80  and  81-115. „  University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  135. 
„    *          „         No.  403. 
Scec.  xvii.     Brit,  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  1991,  ff.  142-159. 
„  Bodley's  Library,  Oxford,  Eawl.  No.  355  c. 
II.  LIBER  MEDICINARUM  SIVE  RECEPTORUM  LIBER  MEDICINALIUM. 
Scec.  xiv.     Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  56,  ff.  1-100. 
„  „  No.  335,  ff.  1-78  b. 
No.  341,  ff.  1-40  b. 
„  „  No.  3548,  ff.  26-99. 
„  Bodley's  Library,  Oxford,  Digby  161,  ff.  16-23  b. 
„  St.  John's  College,  Oxford,  No.  86,  ff.  53. „  University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  339,  ff.  232. 
„  Eoyal  College  of  Surgeons,  Ireland.     ?  date. 


Manuscripts  of  John  of  Arderne  in  the  various  Libraries,  xxxv 
Scec.  xiv-xv.     University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  112. 
Sate.  xv.     Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  76,  ff.  1-143. 
No.  238,  ff.  8-96  b. 
No.  347,  ff.  2-75. 
No.  795,  ff.  20b.-96b. 
No.  962,  ff.  123b.-248b. 
No.  2122,  ff.  32-74. 
No.  29301,  ff.  3-22,  and  32b.-47  b. 
Bodley's  Library,  Oxford,  Ash.  1434,  ff.  117-131. University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  251. 
Gains  Coll.,  Cambridge,  No.  219. 
University  Library,  Cambridge,  No.  292. 
Trinity  Coll.,  Cambridge,  No.  1153,  ff.  99  +  3. 
Emmanuel  Coll.,  Cambridge,  No.  69  [English]. 
£<«•.  <-n.     Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  563,  ff.  122-129  b. „  University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  403. 
S(fc.  xvii.     Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  MSS.  No.  1991,  ff.  168-224. No.  2271  [English]. 
„  Bodley's  Library,  Oxford,  Rawl.  355  c. 
Scec.  :«'.<•.     Royal   College  of  Surgeons,  England.     Transcript  of  E.  H.'s [Sloane  2271]  abstract. 
III.  COMMENTARY  "  DE  JUDICIIS  URINARUM." 
S&c.  xiv.     University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  328  [English]. 
IV.  Hoc  EST  SPECULUM  PHLEBOTOMIES. 
ticec.  xiv.          Brit.  Museum,  Sloane  56,  ff.  1-2. 
xiv-xv.     University  Library,  Glasgow,  No.  112. „     xv.  „  „  „         No.  251. 
„      „  Emmanuel  College,  Cambridge  No.  69  [English]. 
Y.  SCALA  SANITATIS. 
SCEC.  xv.     Brit.  Museum,  1080  A,  ff.  31  b.-36  b. 


xxxvi  Table  of  Contents. 
[Sloane  MS.  6,  leaf  141.] 
A  tretis  extracte  of  Maistre  lohn  Arden  of  fistula  in  ano  and 
of  fistula  in  oj>er  place}  of  ]>e  body  and  of  aposteme}  makyng 
fistule}  and  of  emoraide^  &  tenasmon  and  of  clistere} :  of  certayn 
oyntemente^  poudre^  &  oyles. 
Fistula  in  ano. 
1.  Of  J>e  ploge  of  ffistula  in  ano  &  of  the  manere  of  )>e  leche  &  of 
instruments  necessary  for  }>e  fistle.     [p.  1] 
2.  Of  aposteme?  in  >e  lure  causyng  }>e  fistul  &  of  >e  cure  of  ]>am.   [p.  11] 
3.  Of  diffinicion  of  a  fistule  and  place3  >at  it  is  bred  in  &  when 
it  is  curable  or  noujt.     [p.  20] 
4.  Of  a  maner  of  wirchyngin  fistul  in  ano  &  >e  curyng  ]>erof.    [p.  21] 
5.  Of  ano)>er  maner  wirchyng  in  ]>e  same  fistule  and  >e  cure  wij> 
diuerse  exemplej.     [p.  28] 
6.  Of  bubo  wijnn  )>e  lure  &  J>e  impossibilite  or  myche  hardnes  of 
>e  cure  of  it.     [p.  37] 
Fistula  in  the  limbs. 
7.  Of  fistule3  in  >e  fyngers  &  hardness  of  cure  of  it.     [p.  42] 
8.  Of  fistulej  in  }>e  lawe  joyntour  of  )>e  fyngers  &  in  fe  legges,  knees 
fete  &  ankles  wij>  corruptyng  of  ]>Q  bones  and  J>e  hardnes  of  )>e 
cure  of  it.     [p.  46] 
9.  Of  J>e  maner  of  cure  of  oon  J>at  had  )>e  fistule  in  >e  legges  aboue 
}>e  ankle,    [p.  47] 
10.  Of  J>e  maner  of  cure  of  ane  aposteme  in  j>e  bojt  of  ]>&  knee  fat 
was  disposid  to  >e  fistule.     [p.  47] 
11.  Of  >e   maner  of  a  ful    hard   cure  in  bolnyng   of   al  a  mannej 
arme.    [p.  49] 
12.  Of  J>e  maner  of  a  cure  of  a  man  >at  was  smyten  on  the  schyn 
bone.    [p.  51] 
13.  Of  the  maner  of  cure  of  a  man  whose  legge  was  sodenly  bolned. 
[p.  52] 
Of  Mormales. 
14.  Of  maner  of  mormales  &  of  |>e  cure  of  >am.    [p.  55] 
Of  Piles. 
15.  Of  emoraides  &  of  ]>e  cure  of  >am'    [p.  64] 
Of  Tenesmus. 
16.  Of  j^enasmon  &  rhagadej  and  of  >e  cure  of  >am.    [p.  71] 


Table  of  Contents.  xxxvii 
Of  Prolapse. 
17.  Of  goyng  out  of  J>e  lure  &  ]>e  cure  J>ere-of.     [p.  74] 
Of  Clysters. 
18.  Of  clistere?  and  l>e  maner  of  J>am.     [p.  74] 
Of  Powders. 
19.  Of  >e  property  of  Vitriol,     [p.  79] 
20.  Of  >e  pj-opertej  of  Alum.     [p.  81] 
21.  Of  >e  property  of  Vertgrej.     [p.  82] 
22.  Of  >e  propertej  of  arsenic  &  auripigment.    [p.  82] 
23.  Of  makyng  of  f>em  &  of  }>e  werchynge.     [p.  85] 
24.  Of  makyng  of  pulv.  sine  pari  &  of  J>e  wirchyng.    [p.  86] 
25.  Of  makyng  of  sanguis  veneris  &  of  }>e  wirchyng.     [p.  89] 
26.  Of  makyng  of  salus  populi  &  of  \>e  werchyng.    [p.  90] 
27.  Of  makyng  of  nerbone  &  of  j>e  werchyng.     [p.  91] 
Of  Oils  and  Waters. 
28.  Of  makyng  of  Olei  Seriac.     [p.  91] 
fOf  makyng  of  Unguentum  arabicum. 
29.  -!  Of  makyng  of  tapsimel. 
I  Of  makyng  of  diaflosmus.     [p.  92] 
30.  Of  makyng  of  puhm  grecus.     [p.  92] 
31.  Of  makyng  of  oyle  of  roses,     [p.  92] 
32.  Of  makyng  of  oyle  of  violettej.     [p.  93] 
33.  Of  makyng  of  oyle  of  camamulle.     [p.  94] 
34.  Of  makyng  of  oyle  of  mastikk.     [p.  95] 
35.  Of  makyng  of  oyle  of  almaundej.     [p.  95] 
36.  Of  makyng  of  water  of  almande3.     [p.  95] 
37.  Of  makyng  of  oyle  of  juniper,    [p.  96] 
38.  Of  makyng  of  ane  enoyntment  of  juniper,     [p.  96] 
39.  Of  makyng  of  a  gode  emplastre  for  )>e  goute.     [p.  96] 
40.  Of   the   properte    of  walwort   &   makyng  of  ]>e  juse   &   poudre 
of  it.     [p.  97] 
Of  Valences. 
41.  Of  makyng  of  valence  of  scabious  or  mattefelon.     [p.  97] 
42.  Of  makyng  of  valence  of  wormode.     [p.  98] 
43.  Of  makyng  a  man  slepe  withottt  pulverej  or  pille}  or  enoy[n]te- 
ment.    [p.  100] 
44.  Of  J>e  mane?-  of  wakyng  of  hym.     [p.  101] 


Sloaue  MS.  2002,  leaf  24,  back. 
PI.ATK  I. — A  Master  of  Surgery  in  the  fourteenth  century. 


Joint on 
[Sloane  6,  leaf  141,  back.] 
Of  the  ploge  of  fistula  in  ano,  and  of  J^e 
manere  of  J?e  leche,  and  of  instrumentis 
necessary  for  J?e  fistule. 
4  |__L9  J-John  Arderne  fro  the  first  pestilence  that  was 
in  the  $ere  of  oure  lord  1349  duellid  in  Newerk  in 
Notyngham-shire  vnto  the  $ere  of  oure  lord  1370,  and 
ther  I  helid  many  men  of  fistula  in  ano.  Of  whiche  the 
8  first  was    Sire   Adam    Euerynghain  of   laxton-in-the-clay   sir  Adam  de 
byside  Tukkesford;  whiche  Sire  Adam,  forsoth,  was  in  ham0" Gascone   with    sir   Henry,    that   tyme    named    Erie    of 
derby  and  aftir  was  made  duke  of  lancastre,  a  nohle  and 
12  wortlii  lord.  The  forsaid  sir  Adam,  forsoth,  suffrand 
fistulam  in  ano,  made  for  to  aske  counsel  at  ati  the  lechej 
and  cirurgien$  that  he  my^t  fynde  in  Gascone,  at  Bur- 
deux,  at  Briggerac,  Tolows,  and  Neyrbon,  and  Peyters, 
16  and  many  other  places.     And  all  forsoke  hym  for  vncur-   He  had  lost 
able  ;  whiche  y-se  and  y-herde,  )>e  forseid  Adam  hastied   recovery,0' for  to  torne    horn  to    his    centre.     And  when    he   come 
home,  he  did  of   al   his  knyjtly  clothinges  and  cladde 
20  mornyng  clothes,  in  pwpose  of  abydyng  dissoluyng,  or 
lesyng,  of  his  body  beyng  nij  to  hym.  At  last  I,  forseid 
Ioh~n  Arderne,  y-sou^t  and  couenant  y-made,  come  to  hym 
and  did  my  cure  to  hym  and,  oure  lord  beyng  meue,1  I 
24  helid  hym  perfitely  within  half  a  ^ere  ;  and  aftirward,  but  lived  in 
hole  and  sounde,  he  ledde  a  glad  lif  by  30  jere  and  more,  strength"  '' 
ffor  whiche  cure  I  gatte  myche  honour  and  louyng  pur^  is^'nu"1 
al  ynglond.  And  the  forseid  duke  of  lancastre  and  many  opera^o"*" 
28  othir  gentile}  wondred  ther-of.  Aftirward  I  cured  hugon 
derlyng  of  ffowick  of  Balne  by  Snayfe.  Aftirward  I ARDERNE.  B 


2        Arderne' s  previous  Cures.     Ignorance  of  former  Surgeons. 
Patients 
cured  by 
Arderne, 
knights  and 
priests, 
merchants 
and  friars. 
[*  leaf  142] 
Arderne 
gives  the 
glory  to  God and  humbles 
himself. 
cured  lohn  Schefeld  of  Bri}twell  a-side   Tekyll.     Aftir- 
ward I  cured  sir  Eeynald  Grey,  lord  of  Wilton  in  Wale} 
and  lord  of  Schirlond  biside  Chesterfelde,  wliiche  asked 
counsel  at  the  most  faniose  leches  of  yngland,  and  none  4 
availed   hym.     Aftirvvard  I  cured  sir  Henry  Blakborne, 
clerk,  Tresorer  of  the  lord  Prince  of  Wale}.     Aftirward  I 
cured  Adam  Oumfray  of   Shelforde  byside  Notyngham, 
and  sir  lonn,  preste  of  the   same  toune ;    and  lofin  of  8 
holle  of  Shirlande ;   and  Sir  Thomas  hamelden,  pa?-sone 
of  langare  in  the  Vale  of  Beuare.     Aftirward  I  curid  frere 
Thomas  Gunny,  custode  of  the  frere  Mynows  of  3orke. 
Aftirward,  in   the   }ere   of  oure   lord  1370,  I  come   to  12 
london,  and  ther  I  cured  lonii  Colyn,  Mair  of   North- 
ampton), that  asked  counsel  at  many  leche}.     Aftirward 
I  helid  or   cured  Hew  Denny,  ffisshmanger  of  london), 
in  Briggestrete ;  and  William  Polle,  and  l\aufe  Double;  16 
and   oon  that  was   called  Thomas  Broune,  that  had  15 
holes  by  whiche  went  out  wynde  with  egestious  odour; 
that  is  to  sey,  8  hole}  of  the  to[ne]  party  of  the  ersse, 
and  7  on  the  tothir  side;   Of  whiche   some  hole}  was  20 
distant  fro  the  towell  by  the  space  of  the  handbrede  of  a 
man,   so   that   bothe  his   buttoki's  was    so   vlcerat   and 
putrefied  with-in  that  the  quitour  and  filthe  went  out  ich 
day  als  mych  as  an  egg-shel  mi}t  take.     Afterward  *I  24 
cured  4  frere}  prechours,  that  is  to  sey  ffrere  lohn  Writell, 
ffrere   lohri  haket,  ffrere   Petre   Browne,  ffrere  Thomas 
Apperley,  and   a   }ong   man   called   Thomas  Yoke.     Of 
whiche  forseid  som  had  only  on  hoi  y-distauute  fro  the  28 
towel  by  oon  ynche,  or  by  two,  or  by  thre.     And  other[s] 
had  4  or  5  hole}  procedyng  to  the  codde  of  the  testicle}  ; 
And  many  other  maners  of  whiche  the  tellyng  war  ful 
hard.     All  thise  forseid  cured  I  afore  the  makyng  of  this  32 
boke.     Oure  lord  Ihesu  y-blessid  God  knoweth  that  I  lye 
not,  and  therfore  no  man  dout  of  this,  fof-al  old  famous 
men  and  ful  clere  in   studie   haue   confessed  tham  that 
thei  fande  nat  the  wey  of  curacion)  in  this  case,   ffor  god,  36 
that  is  deler  or  rewarder  of  wisdom,  hath  hid  many  thingis 
fro  wise  men  and  slije  whiche  he  vouchesaf  aftirward  for 
to  shewe  to  symple   men.     Therfore   al  men  fat  ar  to 
come   aftirward  witte   thai   that   old  maistre}  war  no}t  40 


Arderne  specially  skilled  in  Operations  for  Fistula. 
1  non  tran- seuntibus 
sed  persever- gntibus  pul- gantibus 
aperitur. 
2  "diu 
avidius  " says  the  best Latin  text. 
bisie  ne  pertinacej  in  sekyng  and  serchyng  of  this  forseid 
cure.  But  for  thai  mi$t  nojt  take  the  hardnes  of  it  at  the 
first  frount,  thei  kest  it  vtterly  byhinde  fair  bak.  Of 
4  whiche,  forsop,  som  demed  it  holy  for  to  be  incurable ; 
o)>er  applied  doutful  opinions.  Therfore  for-als-miche 
in  hard  thingis  it  spedith  to  studiers  for  to  perseuere  and 
abide,  and  for  to  turne  subtily  thair  wittes.  ffor  it  is  opned 
8  not  to  Jam  that  ar  passand  but  to  tham  J>at  ar  perseuer- 
and.1  Therfore  to  the  honour  of  god  alrny^ti  that  hath 
opned  witte  to  me  that  I  shuld  fynde  tresour  hidde  in  the 
felde  of  studiers  that  long  tyme  and  [with]  pantyng  breest 
12  I  haue  swette  and  trauailed  ful  bisily  and  pe/-tinacely  in 
diuanudiis.2  As  my  faculte  suffice^  Avithout  fair  spekyng 
of  endityng,  I  haue  broujt  for  to  shew  it  openly  to  tham 
that  cometh  aftur,  our  lord  beyng  me[ne]  and  this  boke. 
16  ]STojt  that  I  shewe  myself  more  worthi  of  louyng  of  suche 
a  gifte  than  other,  but  that  I  greue  not  god,  and  for  the 
dragme  that  he  hath  giffen  to  me  that  I  be  not  constreyned 
for  treson.  Therfore  I  pray  that  the  grace  of  the  holy 
20  gost  be  to  this  werke,  that  he  vouch-saf  for  to  spede  it ; 
that  tho  thingis  whiche  in  wrokyng  trewly  I  am  ofte 
tymes  experte,  I  may  plenerly  explane  tham  in  this  litel 
boke.  And  this  I  sey  that  I  know  no$t  in  al  my  tyme, 
24  ne  hard  not  in  al  my  tyme,  of  any  man,  noufer  in 
yngland  ne  in  partie}  bi^ond  )>e  see,  that  kouthe  cure 
fistula  in  ano ;  outake  a  frere  minow  that  was  with  the 
prince  of  Wale^  in  gascon  &  gyan,  whiche  rosed  <fc  hosted 
28  hym  that  he  had  cured  the  forseid  sekenes.  And  at 
london  he  deceyued  many  men  ;  and  Avhen  he  mi^t  nojt 
cure  soni  man,  he  made  suggestion  to  tham  that  no  man 
mi^t  cure  tham,  and  that  aifermed  he  with  sweryng  that 
32  }if  the  fistule  war  dried,  that  the  pacient  at  the  next  shuld 
no3t  eschape  dethe  ;  whiche,  forsofe,  y-lefte  &  forsake  of 
hym  I  cured  perfitely.  And  to  remoue  false  opinions  of 
ignorant  men,  for  witnes  I  putte  experience.  Auicen, 
36  forsop,  seij),  '  experience  ouercomej)  reson ' ;  and  galien 
in  pantegni  sei]>,  '  No  man  *  ow  for  to  trust  in  reson 
al-oon  but  $it  it  be  proued  of  experience.'  And  he  seith 
in  anofer  place,  'Experience  without  reson  is  feble,  & 
40  so  is  reson  withoute  experience  fest  vnto  hym.'     Nefer- 
The  old 
masters  in 
surgery 
neglected rates  of fistula, 
but  Arderne 
devoted 
himself 
specially  to their  study, 
and  fears  to hide  his 
talent  in  a 
napkin 
(Matt.  xxv. 
14-29). 
No  one  in 
England  or abroad 
undertake* cases  of 
fistula 
except  one ininnrite  in 
tlie  retinue 
of  the  Black 
Prince,  and 
he  is  a  fraud. 
Avicenna's opinion  of the  value  of 
practice  and theory. 
(*  leaf  142 
back] 


The  Qualities  required  in  a  good  Surgeon. 
Arderne 
that  some 
incurable. 
required  in 
a  good 
piety, 
charity, 
modesty, 
gravity, 
careful  in 
iiek«)eps; 
studious, 
sober, 
not 
gluttonous, 
nor  cynical 
lesse  I  affenue  nojt  that  I  niijt  liele  al  ffistulae  in  ano.  ffor 
som  ben  vncurable  as  it  shal  be  seid  [more  fully]1  Avithin 
when  I  sbal  trete  of  tham.     ffirst  it  bihoueth  hym  tbat 
\f[\  profite  in  tbis  crafte  tbat  be  sette  god  afore  eu«?'more  in  4 
all  bis  werkis,  and  euermove  calle  mekely  with  bert  and 
mouth  his  help;  and  som  tyme  visits  of  his  wynnyngis 
poure  men  aftir  his  my^t,  tbat  thai  by  thair  prayers  may 
gete  hym  grace  of  the  holy  goste.     And  tbat  he  be  no^t  8 
y-founden  temerarie  or  bosteful  in  his  seyingis  or  in  bis 
dedes  ;  and  abstene  he  hym  fro  moche  speche,  and  most 
among   grete   men  ;  and   answere   he   slei^ly   to   things 
y-asked,  that  he  be  nojt  y-take  in  his  wordes.     fforsoth  12 
}if  his  werkes  be  oft  tyme  knowen  for  to  discorde  fro  his 
wordes  and  his  byhestis,  he  shal  be  balden  more  vnworthi, 
and  he  shal  blemmyash  his  oone  gode  fame.     Wherfore 
seif  a  versifiowr,  '  vincat  opus  verbum,  minuit  iactantia  16 
famam  '  ;    Mat   werke    ouercome    thi    worde,    for    boste 
lessenej)  gode  lose.'     Also  be  a  leche  nojt  mich  laugliyng 
ne  mich  playing.     And  als  nioche  as  he  may  withoute 
harme  fle  he  )>e  felawsbippe  of  knafes  and  of  vnu[n]este  20 
persones.     And  be  be  euermore  occupied  in  thingis  that 
biholdith  to  liis  cratte  ;  outhir  rede  he,  or  studio  he,  or 
write  or  pray  he  ;  for  the  excercyse  of  bokes  worshippef 
a  leche.     ffor  why  ;   he  shal  boj>  byholden  and  he  shal  24 
be  more  wise.     And  aboue   al  pise  it  profiteth  to  hym 
that    he    be'  founden   euermore   sobre;  ffor  dronkennej destroyeth  al  vertu  and  bringith  it  to  not,  as  seith  a  wise 
man,  '  Ebrietas  frangit  quicquid  sapiencia  tangit  '  :  '  Dron-  28 
kenes  breketh  what-so  wisdom  toucheth.'     Be  he  content 
in  strange  places  of  metes   and   drinkes    ]>er  y-founden, . 
vsyng  niesure  in  al   thingis.     ftor  the   wise  man   seitb, 
'  Sicut  ad  onme  quod  est  mensuram  ponere  prodest,  Sic  32 
sine  mensura  deperit  onme  quod  est  '  :  '  As  it  p?-0nteth  to 
putte   mesure   to   al    thing  that   is,    So   without   mesure 
perissliej?   all  }>ing  fat  is.'     Skorne  he  no  man.    ffor  of 
that  it  is  seid,  '  Deridens  alios  uon  inderisus  abibit  '  :  '  He  36 
that   skornej)  other  men  shal   not   go  away  vnskorned.' 
}if  ther  be  made  speche  to  hym  of  any  leche,  nouther 
sette  he  hyrn  at  noujt  ne  preise  hym  to  mich  or   co?n- 
mende  hym,  but  thus  may  he  curteysly  answere  ;  '  I  haue  40 
"Pienius1 i-a'tiu  text. 


The  Qualities  needed  in  a  successful  Surgeon. 
1  "non habeo  de 
eo  yeram 
notitiam  " says  the Latin 
version. 
n  domibus 
ignatum. 
aut  pubem. 
i  colloquia 
6  nimis 
•everus  nee 
uimis 
fainiiiaris 
Bed  in  gestu mediocris 
secundum 
exigentiam 
personarum. 
6  et  si 
viderit 
patient  em •ttentius 
curam 
prosequi. 
no^t  vrey  kuowleche  of  liym,1  but  I  lerned  no^t  ne  I  haue 
not  herd  of  hym  but  gode  aud  honeste.'  And  of  this  shal 
honour  and  thankyngis  of  eche  pa?'ty  encresse  and  multi- 
4  pile  to  hym ;  aftur  this,  honour  is  in  the  honorant  &  no}t 
in  the  honored.  Considers  he  nojt  oner  openly  the  lady 
or  the  doubters  or  o]>er  fair  wy??nnen  in  gret  mennes 2 
[houses]  ne  prof  re  tham  nojt  to  kisse,  ne  touche  not 
8  p?t'uely  ne  apertely  thair  pappes,  ne  thair  handes,  ne 
thair  share,3  that  he  renne  no^t  into  the  indignacion  of  the 
lord  ne  of  noon  of  his.  In  as  moche  as  he  may,  greue  he 
no  seruant,  but  *gete  lie  thair  loue  and  thair  gode  wille. 
12  Abstene  he  hym  fro  harlotrie  als  wele  in  wordes  as  in 
dedes  in  euery  place,  for  ^if  he  vse  hym  to  harlotery  in 
priue  places  som  tyme  in  opene  place  ther  may  falle  to 
hym  vnworship  of  yuel  vsage ;  aftir  pat  it  is  seyde, 
16  '  Pede  super  colles  pedes  vbi  pedere  nolles.'  '  ffart  vpon 
hille}  and  thou  shalt  fart  whar  thou  wolde  no^t  agayn  thi 
wille^.'  And  it  is  seid  in  anoj>er  place,  '  Shrewed  speche4 
corrumpith  gode  maners.'  When  seke  men,  forsoth,  or 
20  any  of  tham  bysyde  come})  to  the  leche  to  aske  help  or 
counsel  of  hym,  be  he  no$t  to  tham  oner  felle  ne  oner 
homely,  but  mene  in  beryng  aftir  the  askyngis  of  the 
personej  5 ;  to  som  reuerently,  to  som  comonly.  ffor  after 
24  wise  men,  Oner  moche  homelynes  brede)>  dispisyng. 
Also  it  spedep  ]>at  he  haue  semyng  excusaoions  that  he 
may  not  incline  to  jjair  askyngw,  without  harmyng  or 
without  indignacion  of  som  gret  man  or  frende,  or  for 
28  necessarie  occupacion.  Or  feyne  he  hym  hurt,  or  for  to  be 
seke,  or  som  other  cou enable  cause  by  whiche  he  may 
likely  be  excused.  Therfor,  }if  he  will  fauowe  to  any 
mannes  askyng,  make  he  couenant  for  his  trauaile,  and 
32  take  it  byforehande^.  But  avise  )?e  leche  hym-sclf  Avele 
that  he  giffe  no  certayn  answer  in  any  cause,  but  he  se 
first  J>e  sikenes  and  the  maner  of  it ;  and  whan  he  ha}j 
seen  and  assaied  it,  J>of-al  hym  seme  that  the  seke  may 
36  be  heled,  nejjerlesse  he  shal  make  pronosticacion  to  Jje 
pacient  }>e  perilej  to  come  ^if  the  cure  be  diflerred.  And 
}if  he  se  ]>e  pacient  perse  we  liisily  the  cure,6  pan  after 
that  )>e  state  of  ]>e  pacient  askej)  aske  he  boldly  more 
40  or  lesse ;   but  euer  be  he  warre  of  scarse  askyngis,  ffor 
courteous, 
and  not 
jealous  of other 
leeches  ; 
continent, 
friendly  to servants, 
[•  leaf  143] 
chaste ; 
easy  of address, 
neither  too 
rough  nor too  familiar 
not  too ready  to 
undertake a  case, 
and  always 
to  see  it 
be  fore giving ail  vice  ; 
to  have  a 
clear  under- 
standing 
about  the 
fee  before ojieraiiog. 


Advice  to  a  Surgeon  about  Fees  and  Behaviour. 
The  cost 
operation. 
prognosis  as 
duration  of 
reasons 
[*  leaf  us, 
to  be  clean 
person, 
to  cultivate 
oner   scarse   askyngis   settef   at  not   both   fe    markette 
and    the    thing.     Therfore   for   the    cure    of    fistula   in 
ano,    when   it   is    curable,   aske    he    co?npetently,    of    a 
worthi  man  and  a   gret   an   hundred   marke    or   fourty  4 
pounde,    waf   robe^   and  fee}1  of  an  hundred   sliillyng 
terme  of  lyfe  by  ^ere.     Of  lesse  men  fourty  poxinde,  or 
fourty  marke  aske  he  without  fee^  ;    And  take  he  no^t 
lesse  fan  an  hundred  shillyngte.    ffor  neuer  in  all  my  lyf  8 
toke  I  lesse  than  an  hundred  shillyng  for  cure  of  that 
sekenes.     Nef  erlesse  do  another  man  as  hym  fink  better 
and  more   spedefulle.     And   $if   the   pacientes  or   thair 
frendej  or  seruauntj  aske  by  how  moche  tyme  he  hopeth  12 
to  hele  it,  euermore  lat  the  leche  byhete  fe  double  fat 
he  supposeth  to  spede  by  half  ;  that  is  jif  the  leche  hope 
to  hele  pe  pacient  by  twenty  wekes  —  that  is  the  comon 
course  of  curyng  —  adde  he  so  many  ouer.    ffor  it  is  better  16 
that  the  terme  be  lengthed  fan  the  cure,    ffor  p?'olonga- 
cion  of  the  cure  giffef  cause  of  dispairyng  to  the  pacientej 
when  triste  to  the  leche  is  moste  hope  of  helthe.     And 
^if  the  pacient  considere  or  wondre  or  aske  why  that  he  20 
putte  hym.  so  long  a  tyme  of  curyng,  sife  fat  he  heled 
hym  by  the  half,  answere  he  that  it  was  for  that  the 
pacient  was  strong-herted,  and  suffrid  wele  sharp  fingis, 
and  that  he  was  of  gode  complexion  andhadde  ableflesshe  24 
to  hele  ;  &  feyne  he  othir  causes  pleseable  to  the  pacient, 
ffor  pacientej  of  syche  worde^  are  proude  and  delited.    Also 
dispose  a  leche  *hym  that  in  clothes  and  othir  apparalyngis 
be  he  honeste,  no^t  likkenyng  hymself  in  apparalyng  or  28 
berying  to  mynistrallej,  but  in  clothing  and  beryng  shew 
he  the  maner  of  clerkes.    ffor  why  ;  it  semeth  any  dis- 
crete man  y-cladde  with  clerkis  clothing  for  to  occupie 
gentil  mewnej  bordej.    U  Haue  the  leche  also  clene  haudes  32 
and  wele  shapen  nailej  &  clensed  fro  all  blaknes  and  filthe. 
And  be  he  curtaise  at  lorde}  borde^,  and  displese  he  no$t 
in  wordes  or  dedes  to  the  gestes  syttyng  by  ;  here  he  many 
fingis  but  speke  he  but  fewe.     IF  For  a  wise  man  seith,  36 
'  It  semeth  more  to  vse  the  eres  than  f  e  tunge  '  ;  And  in 
an-ofer  place,   '  jif  thou  had  bene  stille  thou  had  bene 
liolden  a  philosophic.'     And  whan  he  shal  speke,  be  the 
wordej  short,  and,  als  mich  as  he  may,  faiie  and  resonable  40 


The  Behaviour  oj  a  yood  Surgeon. 
1  dui'liciter sen  no. 
2  Si  mens 
vestra 
appetat 
quod demulcat, 
prius  bibite 
qnod  dolet 
et  sic  per amarum 
poculum confectionis 
pervenitnr 
ad  gaudia salutis. 
and  witlioute  sweryng.  U  Be  war  that  ther  be  neuer 
founden  double  worde1  in  his  mouthe,  ffor  }if  he  be 
founden  trew  in  his  wordes  ffewe  or  noon  shal  doute  in 
4  his  dedej.  Lere  also  a  $ong  leche  gode  prouerbej  per- 
tenyng  to  his  crafte  in  counfortywg  of  pacientej.  U  Or 
jif  pacientes  pleyne  that  ther  medicynes  beue  bitter  or 
sharp  or  sich  other,  than  shal  the  leche  sey  to  the  pacient 
8  thus ;  "It  is  redde  in  the  last  lesson  of  matyns  of  the 
natiuite  of  oure  lord  that  oure  lorde  Thesus  criste  come 
into  this  world  for  the  helthe  of  mannes  kynd  to  the 
maner  of  a  gode  leche  and  wise.  And  when  he  cometh 
12  to  the  seke  man  he  sheweth  hym  medicynes,  som  lijt 
and  som  hard;  and  he  sei}>  to  the  seke  man,  '}if  fou 
wilt  be  made  hole  fise  and  fise  shal  thou  tak.'  U  Also 
in  another  place  in  an  omely^vpon  the  gospel  of  the  sonej 
16  of  Zebedee,  wher  fer  moder  askid  seying,  'lord,  sey  fat 
my  two  sones  sitte  in  thy  kyngdome,  fe  tone  on  fi  rijt 
hand  and  the  to]>er  on  the  left.'  And  Ynesus  ausweryng 
seide,  '  3e  wote  neuer  what  36  aske ' ;  fan  seid  he  to  the 
20  sone^  of  Zebedee,  '  May  30  drink  f  e  chalice  fat  I  am  to 
drink  1 '  )?ai  seid  to  him,  '  We  may ' ;  as  $if  he  seid  to 
fam,  *^if  ^oure  soule  or  mynd  couaite  fat  delitef, 
drinke  fe  first  fat  sorowef  or  akef.'  And  so  by  bitter 
24  drinkis  of  confeccion  it  is  come  to  the  ioyes  of  helfe."2 
Ouer  that  hym  ow  to  comforte  f e  pacient  in  monysshyng 
hym  that  in  anguisshej  he  be  of  gret  hert.  ffor  gret  hert 
makef  a  man  hardy  and  strong  to  suffre  sharp  fingis 
28  and  grcuous  :  And  it  is  a  gret  vertue  and  an  happy,  ffor 
Boecius  seif ,  I)e  disciplina  scolarium, '  He  is  no3t  worf  i  of 
fe  poynt  of  swetnes  that  kan  nojt  be  lynied  with  greu- 
yng  of  bitterues.  ffor  why  ;  a  strong  medicyne  answerith 
32  to  a  strong  sekenes.'  And  f  eron  seif  a  wise  man,  '  Be 
no  cure  sene  heuy  or  greuous  to  the  to  whiche  folowef 
ane  heleful  effecte.'  H  And  in  anofe?-  place  it  is  seid, 
'  happy  or  blessid  be  fat  day  fat  ordeynef  mery  jeres.' 
36  And  anoj>er  seith,  '  he  may  neuer  be  in  reste  of  body  fat 
is  oute  of  reste  of  soule ;  I  wil  suffre  lesse  fingis  fat  I 
suffre  nojt  more  greuous.'  It  semef  a  gret  herted  man 
for  to  suffre  sharp  fingis ;  he,  forsof,  fat  is  wayke  of 
40  hert  is  no^t  in  way  of  curacion,  ffor  *why  ;  for  sofe  in  al 
and  not  to 
be  foul- in  onthed or  lying. 
He  should 
have  a  store 
of  comfort- able  sayings. 
The  effect 
of  mind  on body. 
[»  3eafl44) 


The  Duly  of  a  Surgeon  to  his  Patient. 
The  leech 
should  have 
also  a  good stock  of 
merry  tales, 
and  should 
most  strictly 
keep  his  own counsel 
about  the 
valient. 
The  names 
of  the instruments 
used  in  the 
operation for  fistula: 
the  probe, 
Qnamvis. 
my  lyf  I  liaue  sene  but  fewe  laborante  in  pis  vice  lieled 
in  any  sikenes  :  ptrfore  it  is  to  be-war  to  wise  men  pat 
)>ei  entreinette  no^t  with  sich.     ffor  win  ;  )pe  wise  man 
sei)>,  '  All  Binges  ar  hard  to  a    waik  liert  man,  for   pai  4 
trow    euermore  yuelle^  to   be   nyje   to   pam  ;    pei    drede 
euermore,  pai  suffre  no  pingis,  ])ai  are  euennore  vnstable 
and  vnwise  ;  perfore  a  versifiowr  seip  of  tham,  '  Q?<omwus  l 
nil   pacior   paciendi   me  tenet  horror  '  :    pat  is    pof-al    I  8 
suffre  no-ping,  vgglynes  of  suffryng  holdeth  me.     U  Also 
it  spedeth  pat  a  leche  kunne  talke  of  gode  tale}  and  of 
honest  that  may  make  J>e  pacientes  to  laugh,  as  wele  of  the 
biblee  as  of  other  tragediej  ;  &  any  othir  pingis  of  which  it  12 
is  no^t  to  charge  while}  pat  pey  make  or  induce  a  li^t  hert 
to  pe  pacient  or  pe  sike  man.    ^T  Discouer  neuer  the  leche 
vnwarly  the  counsellej  of  his  pacientej,  als  wele  of  men  as 
of  wymmen,  ne2  sette  nojt  oon  to  anoper  at  nojt,  pof-al  16 
he  bane  cause,  pat  he  be  no$t  gilty  of  couwsell  ;  ffor  jif  a 
man  se  pe  hele  wele  anoper  mawnes  counsel  lie  wil  trist 
better  in  J?e.     Many  Binges,  forsope,   bene  to  be  kepte 
of  a  leche,  wijxnite  J>ese  fat  ar  seid  afore,  )>at  may  nojt  20 
be  noted  here  for  ouer  moche  occupying.     But  it  is  no^t 
to  dout  pat  if  }>e  forseid  be  wele  kepte  fat-ne  J>ai  shal 
giffe  a  gracious  going  to  pe  vser  to  J>e  hijte  of  worship 
and  of  wynnyng  3  ;  for  Caton  seij),  '  Virtutem  primam  puta  24 
esse  compescere  linguam  '  :  The  first  vertu  trow  you  to  be 
to   refreyne  )>e  tong.     Aftur  al  pise  it  houeth  that  he 
knowe  J>e  names  of  pe  instrumentis  pat  perteneth  to  pe 
cure  of  pe  fistule,  withoute  whiche  a  leche  may  nojt  wele  28 
spede  hym.     Of  whiche  pe  first  is  called  '  Sequere  me  ' 
—  'follow  me'  —  whose  shap  is  shewed  wher  pe  iustrumente^ 
ar  paynted  [fig.  1].     And  it  is  called  '  Sequere  me  '  for  it 
is  pe  first  instrument  pertenyng  to  pat  werk  ;  for  a  lech  32 
ow  for  to  serche  per-with  pe  way  of  pe  fistule  whider  it 
gop,  wheper  by  pe  middej  of  longaon  or  no^t.     And  it 
ow  to  be  made  on  pe  same  mane?-  as  wymmen  vsep  in 
pair  heuede},4  and  of  pe  same  metal;  and  it  ow  to  be  36 
smal  pat  it  may  li^tly  be  plied  &  replied.     And  be  pe 
heuede^  5  als  little  as  pai  may  wele  be,  elle^  pai  mi^t  no$t       5  capita. 
wele  entere  pe  moup  of  pe  fistule  for  pe  streitnes  of  it. 2  MS.  be. 
generosum. 
4  in  capiti- 


The  Instruments  required  for  a  Fistula  Operation. 
the  grooved director, 
ffor  why;  oft  tyme^  ffistule  in  ano  hath  rijt  smale  hole}, 
so  pat  soin    tyme    pai  shew    no$t   but    pat  per   appereth 
bolnyng    in    pe    mouses    of    pam.      Afterward    is    per 
4  anoper    instrument,    put     is     called    '  Acus    rostrata,'    a 
snowted  nedle,  for  it  hath  pe  tone  heued  like  a  snowte, 
and   in   pe  toper  an  y^e  like  a  nedel  by  whiche  preiles 
ow  to  be  drawen  agnyu  by  middej  of  pe  fistule,  as  it  siial 
8  be  seid  wz'tAin  in  his  place.     And  it  ow  to  be  of  siluer,  as 
it  is  paynted ;  and  it  ow  to  be  no  gretter  ne  lenger  in  pe 
snowte  pan  as  it  is  paynted,  but  it  ow  to  be  longer  atte 
pe  left,  pat  it  contene  in  al  8  ynches  in  lenghfe.1     IT  )3e 
12  prid  instrument  is  called  '  tendiculuw,'  and  it  ow  to  be 
made   of    boxe    or    of    anojjir    competent    tree,   nouper 
lenger   ne   gretter   pan   his   shap   is   paynted.      And    it 
ow  to  haue  an  hole  purgh  in   pe  side,  as  it  is  peynted,   ti'e  P*B. 
16  In  whiche  hole  be  per  putte  *2in  a  wrayst,3  by  middej 
of  whiche  wraiste   in  pe  ouer  ende  shal  be  a  litel  hole 
purgh  whiche  shal  be  putte  pe  two  ende}  of  grete  prede 
peramim.        four  folde,  goyng  atte  firste  by  pe  towel4  and  pe  hole  of 
20  pe  fistule ;   whiche  prede  is  called  ffrenum  cesaris,  and 
the  whiche  also  goyng  atuyx  pe  wraiste,  in  wraistyng  pe 
skynne  atuyx  pe  tewel  &  pe  listule  be  faste  constreyned 
aboue  pe  snowte  of  pe  nedel,  vnto  j?at  kittyng  be  done. 
24  'Siringa'  is  an  holow  instrument  by  pe  midde^,  and  it 
ow   to   be  made  of   the  shappe  as    it   is    peynted   here, 
nouper  gretter  ne  lenger,  but  euen  after  pe  shappe  as  it 
is  peynted  here ;  ne  haue  it  no^t  but  oon  hole  in  pe  neper 
28  ende   or  smaller  ende,  as  it  is  peynted  here  [see  p.  10, 
Plates  II  and  III]. 
2  The  words  from  here  to  the  end  of  this  page  are  reproduced  in facsimile  in  Plate  III. 
1  ad  minus- octo 
pollices contineat. 
"uuum 
vertile 
Anplice 
'  a  wrayste impouatur. 
the  dilator, 
[«  leaf  144, back] 
the 
"Syringe." 


10 
Arderne's  Instruments  for  cure  of  Fistula. 
TLATE  II.— The  instruments  used  by  John  Arderne  in  the  cure  of  fistula. 
(1)  The  probe— sequere  me  ;  (2)  The  snouted  needle— acus  rostrata  ;  (3)  The  dilator— tendiculum  ; 
(4)  The  strong  thread— Frsenum  Caesaris ;  (5)  The  peg— vertile— fitting  into  the  hole  in  the  wide 
part  of  the  tendiculum ;  (0)  The  syringe  in  general  use  with  lateral  openings ;  (6«)  Arderne's modification  of  the  syringe  with  a  terminal  opening  only.  [From  Sloane  MS.  2002,  leaf  24.] 




tJU ^  *!<** 






The  Signs  and  Symptoms  of  an  Ischio-rectal  Abscess.  1  1 
Of  be  aposteme5  in  be  lure  causyug  be  fistufe,     ueafusj 
and  be  cure  of  tham. 
2.  I         Ihof-al  he  principal   entent  was   for   to   trute  de   ischio-recui abscess  a 
4  fistula  in  ano,  iSelwles  it  spedeb  first  for  to  touche  som-   common 
.  .  cause  of  tis- 
iveiexterius  what  of  apostenie  bredyng  ber-in  or  ni^e,1  sibe  oft  tyme  tula. 
aposteme}  bredyng  ber  bene  cause  of  fistule  or  of  cancre. 
ffor,  after  auctowrs,  Apostenie  y-bred  in  any  place  of  be 
8  body,  if  it  be  not  y-helid  by  )>re  or  four  monebes,  it  is 
turned  into  a  fistule  or  a  cancre.  Therfore  when  ther 
falleth  ane  apostenie  in  be  lure  or  nije1  bou  shalt  knowe 
it  by  bese  signes  ;  bat  is  by  bolnyng,  akyng,  brywnyng,  signs  of  an 
2  per  12  ?ekyng  &  prikkyng.2     And  the  pacient  for  akyng  and   abscess60 tumorem  et  .  . 
doioreia,  anguissh    may  nouber  sitte  ne  hgge   ne  slepe.     Whiche ardorem  .      .  . 
atque  apperyng,  rhrst  it  is  to  labowr  to  be  slakyng  or  esyng  ot 
punc'turarn.         the  akyng  and  brennyng  and  of  ober  accidente}  without 
16  repercussione.    ffor  in  be  lure  ow  no^t  to  be  repercussion, 
si  be  it  is  ane  emuwctory,  and  in  emu?zctorie3  ow  it  nojt  to 
be    done  ;    bese    bene    emuwctoriej  :  —  be    armeholes,    be 
3"axiii»  beholes,    be     chawellej,3    &c.      And    witte    bou     after inguina  et  Y 
fauces,"  says  20  Gilbertyne  bat  ane   aposteme  beyng   within  be    lure  is  oiibertyn's the  Latin  J          '       .  .    *  J    °  .  .  /  .  treatment text.  cured  Wftn  be  infusion  of  one  roset  in  which  is  ceruse   with  litharge 
distempred,  or  led  brent,  or  litarge,  or  all  bise  if  bai  be 
hadde,  or  with  be  jolk  of  an  ey.     And  he  be  euermore 
24  warre  of   paynyng  of  egestion.     And  }if  his  wombe  be 
*  etsi  venter       costyue  4  be  it  softned  bat  be  hardnes  of  be  ordure  brynir 
constipetur.  .  ' 
no$t  in  anguissh  in  egestion  doyng.     And  be  it  softned 
ane  emplastre  of  nialuej  &  swynes  grese  ;  Or  with   A  piaster 
28  vf&ier  of  decocciouw  of  maluea  and  branne,  with  oile  or  and  pork  fat 
is  good  if butter  fressh,   or  suclie  otlier,  and  be  it  jette  in  by  a  injected 
clisterye.     Therfore  take  oyle  roset  and  medle  it  with  be   glyrterpipe. 
s  tune  }olke  of  a  rawe  ey  in  euen  porcion.     Aftir  putte  it  in  a 
Su.'"11"11  32  little  bleddere,  ban  lake  a  Nastar  of  tree5  and  putle  it  in 
iTneum  fe  ^^a(icle1'  an^  bynde  it  aboute  wib  a  strong  brede,  and 
pe?  med'ium  enoynt  be  for  ende  wele  Avith  oyle  roset,  and  softly  putte 
Nastare  ^  *n  fe  ^urc  an(^  Presse  Jmt  is  in  be  bleddre  with  bi 
vocaTu™  ^  fyngres  in-to  be  lure.  )5is,  forsobe,  swageb  and 
e  in  omnibus  softeneb  )>e  brywnyug,  be  prikkyng,  smertyng  & 
corporis.  aky»g,  and  comforteb  J>e  mernbre  in  bobe  cau.se,6  )>at  is 


12 The  Treatment  of  an  Ischio-rectal  Abscess. 
A  prescrip- tion for  a 
soothing ointment. 
[»  leaf  145, back] 
Lana  sue- ciila  what 
it  is 
Prescrip- tion for  an 
ointment  for 
an  abscess  of 
the  breast. 
bope  in  hote  and  colde.     ffor,  after  auctores,  Oile  roset 
coldej)  ane  hote  membra  and  hote])  ane  colde  membre x ; 
and    it    dop    many    oper    profiles    fere    and   in    al    pe 
membres  of  pe  body.     And  perfore  a  gode  leche  pwruey2  4 
hym  pat  he  want  neuer  oyle  roset,  sipe  per  procedep  of 
it  many  helpyngis  to  mannes  body  ;  for  why  ;  after  Galien 
to  euery  akyng  liote   oile   roset  is  mytigatif.     Vpon  pe 
aposteme,  forsojje,  vtward  be  pntte  a  gode  emplastre  and  8 
ri}t  maturatif  of  diaqwzlon  resolute  with  oile  roset,  or  oile 
of  lilie},  or  of  camamill,  or  dialtred,3  or  comon  oyle,  pat  is 
oyle  of  olyue,  or  swyne  grese,  or  gandres,4  or  maulerdes,5 
or  hennes  grese.    ffor  whi ;  diaquilon  pus  y-ordeyned  and  12 
put-to   maturep   colde   materie}  &  resoluep   &   mollifiep 
hard  materies.     Also  be  per  made  suche  a  vntment  pat  is 
ri^t  mitigatiue.  Recipe  :  tame  comon  malue}6  M.  i  or  M.  ij, 
&  brisse  pam  in  a  morter,  and  put  pam  in   a  quart  of  16 
oyle  of  olyue^  and  lat  pam  putrifie  perin  7  dayes  or  9. 
After  boile   pam   long  at  pe   fire  vnto    pe  oile   be  wele 
grene ;  after  cole  it  and  *  kepe  it  :  pis  oyntment  is  ry}t 
mitigatiue  of  akyng  of  aposteme},  and  mollifiep  pan  if  it  20 
be  put  vpon  [tham]  hote  with  lana  succida.    Lana  succida 
is  wolle  pat  groweth  atuix  pe  legge}  of  ane  ewe  about  pe 
vdder,  ful  of  swet,7  no}t  y-wasshe,  and  it  opnep  strongly 
and  consumeth ;  oyle,  forsope,  of  propw'te  holdep  opne  24 
and  draweth  and  swagep  akyng.     If,  forsop,  pou  haue 
no}t  lanam  succidcm  pan  dippe  a  lyn  clout  in  pe  forseid 
oyntement  and  putte  it  hotte  vppon  and  bynde  it  warly 
pat  it  fal  not  away.     Also  ane  emplastre  of  pe  forseid  28 
malue}  is  a  ful  gode  maturatif  and  mitigatif  of  akyng  in 
aposteme}  of  pe  lure  and  of  wy?»men}  pappe},  and  to  al 
oper  aposteme}  pat  nedep  maturacion.     And  it  is  made 
pus.     Recipe :    malue}   tame   M.  i.    or   ij ;  sepe   pam   in  32 
watir   to  pai  wax  softe,   pan  put  pam  out   of  pe  Avatre 
and  presse  oute  pe  watre  of  pam,  and  aftir  hakke  pam 
small  wip  a  sharp  knyf  on  a  clene  borde  ;  pan  frye  pam 
in  a  panne  ouer  pe  fire  -with  comon   oyle  or  butter  or  36 
swynes  grese,  Or,  if  pe  pacient  be  riche  or  noble,  with 
som  of  pe  forseid  oile}.     And  aftir  vpon  clene  stuppes  be 
it  put  on  pe  aposteme.     And  witte  pou  here  pat  if  pou 
may  haue  wormed  it  profitep  mich  in    curyng  if   it  be  40 
1  oleum  ros. 
membrum 
supercales- cens  infri^i- dat  et  super 
infrigidatum calefecit. 2  "provi- 
deat." 3  dialthsea. •*  anatis. 
8  mallardes. 
6"JIalyas 
dninesticits 
communes." 
7  sudore 
imbuta. 
Nota. 
Pappis  [of] 
wowmen. 


The  Treatment  of  an  Ischio-rectal  Abscess.  13 
soden  &  made  wij>  J>e  forseid  maluej,  for  bat  emplastre   Ardeme  has 
is  best   mitigatiue    of  akyng  of   pappes,    &   bryngeb   in 
quytour  and    conforteb    be    place,   and  make))    be    mater 
4  for  to  vapour  by  be  pore}.     And  for  certeyn  it  availe]>   c 
in  al  aposteme}  in  euery  place  of  ]>e  body,  and  also  in 
many  brissurej.    With  pis  emplastre  in  cures  of  pappes  I 
liaue  y-gette  many  worshippej  and  benefetes,  for  certaynly 
8  it   is   soiiCT-aynly   mitigatyue.     But   witte    bou   after   all 
auctours — and  I  haue  proued  it  for  certayn  experience — 
bat  ane  aposteme  bredyng  nere  be  lure  owe  not  to  abide   Anischio- 
to  it  breste  by  itself,  but  be  leche  owe  bisily  for  to  fele   abscess should  not 
12  wib  his  fynger  be  place  of  the  aposteme,  and  wher-so  is  be  allowed 
founden  any  sof  tones,  ber,  be  pacient  nojt  witty ng,  warly,    butsuouid 1  •  ^e  °Pene(i be   it  boldely  opned    wib   a    ful  sharp  lancette,    bat    be   as  soon  as 
•4.  1    v  Ul    ,q  rt       11          it  softens, quitour  and  be  corrupte  blode  may  gone  oute.  Or  ellej, 
16  forsobe  be  gutte  or  barme  J:at  is  called  longaon,  bat 
deserueb  to  be  lure,  shal  be  bristen  wib-in  be  lure,  and 
presed  byfore  bat  he  aposteme  be  bristen  withoute-forpe. 
Whiche  case  byfallyng,  if  it  al-oonly  brest  within  it  is  of 
20  hard  cure,  and  ban  shal  ber  be  ragadiej  or  frousingej, 
fforsob  if  it  briste  bobe  witAin  and  with-out,  ban   may  otherwise *  J     chronic 
it  neuer  be  cured  but  by  a  ful  experte  cirurgien  in  his   uiceration and  fistula 
craf  te.    ffor  than  may  it  be  firste  day  be  called  a  fistule  ;   may  follow, 
24  sibe  a  fistule   is  nojt  ellej   ban    ane   vlcus   vndesiccable, 
and  for  it   is   vndesiccable,  berf ore  by  consequens   it  is   for  a  r.stuia is  only  an 
vncurable,  sibe  no  wonde  ne  vlcus  may  be  heled  but  if  ulcer  that 
•    i        n  '•  p  cannot  be it  may  be  dried,     oom  tyme  it  bifalleth  som  men  for  to   dried  up. 
28  haue  ane  hole  apperyng  outward  al-oonly,  persyng  bnrj 
be  longaon  wit/an  be  lure  by  be  space  .of  ane  ynche 
or  of  tuo,  and  bisyde  bat  anober  hole  wtt/<-out,  nojt 
persyng  be  longaon  wit/j-in-forb.  And  I  haue  sene  som 
32  haue  7  or  9  holej  on  fe  tone  party  of  be  buttokkis,  and 
6  or  5  on  be  tober  party,  of  whiche  noon  of  bam, 
outake  oon,  persed  longaon.  And  I  haue  sene  som  haue 
2  or  3  holej  on  be    buttokke,   and    2  or  3   descendyng   The  results of  a  fistula. 
36  *doun  into  be  codde  of  be  testiculej.     And  I  haue  sene    [*ieafH6] 
som  haue  oon  hole  or  many  in  be  tone  buttok,  and  oon 
or  tuo  on  be  party  of  be   ^erde  pe?*syng  als  wele  longaon 
as  be  jerde.     And  in  bis  case,  as  by  my  deniyng,  sich 
40  pacientes    bene    vncurable,   and   bat  for    fistulyng  of    be 


14 Sequelae  of  an  Ischio-redal  Abscess. 
Ariierne cured  a 
priest  of  a urethral 
abscess  at 
Master 
Geoffrey 
Scrope'8 house  in 
Lincoln. 
Urethral 
tistulse  are 
sometimes associated 
with  uraemic 
symptoms, 
which 
Bernard  de 
Gordon 
teaches  are due  to  a 
connection 
between  the 
muscles  of 
the  pelvic 
floor,  the 
stomach, and  the 
brain. 
1  Domino 
median  te. 
^erde.     And    fat    may    be    knowen,    for    som-tyme    fe 
sperme  gof  oute  by  fe  hole  of  fe  jerde  infistulate,  and 
som-tyme  vryne  or  bothe.     I^eferlesse  I   cured  a  preste, 
at  lincolne  in  fe  house  of   Maistre  G  iff  ray  Scrope,   fat  4 
had  aposteme  in  his  ^erde,  of  whiclie  als  wele  vryne  as 
quitour  come  doune  into  his  codde,  and  sometyme  blode 
went  oute  by  fe  hole  of  fe  jerde,  and  his  testicules  war 
bolned   out   of   inesure.      Tlierfore,  first,  I  putte  on  his  8 
testicule}  oon  oyntement  ruptorye,  and  I  made  an  hole  by 
whiche  went  out  bothe  vryne  and  quitowr ;  f  is  i-do,  f  er 
shewed  ane  bolnyng   vndernefe   in   fe  jerde  ri^t  be  fe 
lure,  whiche  I  opned  wijj  a  ruptorie;   whiche  y-opned,  12 
\>er  went  out  bofe  quitour  and  vryne.     Whom  y-cured 
pertitely,  oure  lord  beyng  mene  * ;  but  for  certeyne  his  lure 
&   longaon  war  vnhurte.     And  wilte  fou   fat    pis   cure 
was  ful  hard.     )3e?'fore  in  suche  fingis  be  a  leche  avised  16 
and  discrete.     Also  a  leche  owe  to  be  circuwspecte  in  his 
askyngis,  fat  he  enquere  bisily  of  fe  pacient  if  he  fele 
ony  tyme  ventositej  or  egestion^  go  out  by  fe  holes  of 
f  e  fistule.     Also  enquere    he   of  fe  pacient   }if   he  fele  20 
any  heuynes  or  greuousnes  in  his  heued ;  Or  if  it  appere 
to  hym  bat  be  house  some-tyme  is  turned  vp-so-doune  2       2  ut  si 
appareat  ei as  it  shuld  falle,  and  f e  pacient  may  no^t  for  drede  of       quod  domus 
fallyng   enclyne   to   fe   erthe;  And   if    fe   pacient   fele  24  tetur- 
akyng   and  heuynes   or  greuousnes  in  his   lende^3  and       s"etsi 
feblenes  in  his  stomake.     Also  sey  he  to  be  pacient  bus  :       j;ravitatem 
'  I    wote    fat    f e    kynde    of   f e    fistule    is    soche    fat 
somtyme  it  is  opned  by  itself  and   puttef  out  quitour,  28 
somtyme  fikke  and   somtyme   fynne,   somtyme   watery 
and  somtyme  blody.     And  somtyme  it  is  closed  be  itself, 
&  so  by  a  monef  or  more  \er  rennef  no- f  ing  out;  and 
eft-sone^  it  bigynnef  to  ake  or  fat  it  caste  out  quitowr.  32 
And  aftirward  it  is  opned  by  itself,  "and  rennef  as  it  is 
seid  afore,  and  aftirward  it  is  sperred.'4     ffor  suche  pro- 
nosticacions  shewef   and  tokneth   to  fe  pacient   fat  fe 
leche  is  experte  in  fe  knowyng  of  fe  fistule,  and  so  fe  36 
pacient  wil  better  trist  vnto  hym.     And  witte  fou,  aftir 
Bernard  of  Gordon,  fat  fe  synowej  closyng  and  openyng 
fe   lure   hafe   festnyng   with    fe   stomake   and    wif    fe 
ventriculej   of    fe    brayne,  And    for    this   cause   suche  40 
4  et  pnstea 
clauditur. 


Prognosis  of  a  Fistula  in  Ano.  15 
1  in  Capite.         pacientej  ar  som  tyme  vexed  in  be  heued  l  and  in  be 
stomak.     When    be   leche,   forsobe,   hab   talked    bus   to 
be  pacient,   as  it  is  seid,  and  be  pacient  aske  &  pe?-sew 
4  for  to  be    cured    of  hym,    aske   ban    first    be   si^t   of   be 
sekenes :    Whiche  y-sene,  be   be  leche   war   bat  he   put  The  method .  "  ,  .  ,  °f  operating nojt  his  fynger  in   be  lure  of  be  pacient,  ne  shewe  no   not  to  he revealed  to 
pryue  mstrumente}  wher-of   be  pacient  my^t  wonder  or  the  patient 
8  be  aferd ;  or  if  perauenture  be  pacient  haue  wilyly  bro$t   keen.  '* 
in  with  hym  any  leche  for  to  aspye,  as  I  haue  oft  tyme 
sene.     But   considere    be   leche   bisily   be   maner   of    be 
2  Nihil-  fistule,  &  perceyue  if  it  be  curable,     jit  -  a  leche  o\v  for 
12  *to  feyne  perile^  and  hardenes  of  curyng,  and  for  to  make   f*  leaf  146, 
pronosticacions  wilely   bat  be  sikenes    askeb  long  tyme 
of   curyng,   for   bat   bat  be   medicyne}   y-putte   to   may 
not  abyde  long  for  purgyng  of  be  wombe,  and  for  moche 
16  moystenes    goyng   out   of    be    lure,    and    for   many    obir  Questions  to 
lettyngis,  as  for  be  lure  is  to  streyte,  or  be  buttokkes  be   before 
to  grete  or  hard,  or  for  be  pacient  is  waike  of  herte  or  vn-   onTfistuia. 
obedient  for  to  perse w  his  cure  or  for  to  kepe  his  diete,  and 
20  for  many  ober  bat  hym  ow  for  to  feyne  on  his  owne  heued 
3  quw  delict        bathe  supposeth  be  necessary  e.3    And  bise  pronosticated, 
pno  figere  if  be   pacient  stond  stedfastly  bat  he  be  cured,  or  aske 
erastiteiit          if  he  may  be  cured,  ban  sey  be  leche  bus:  'I  dout  nojt,  The fore  neces-  i      *i    i  1-1  •  e  i  prognosis saria.  24  oure  lord  beyug  mene,4  and  bi  gode  pacience  folowyng,   of  an 
4  Domino  iif  bou  wilt  competently  make  satisfaccion  to  me,  as  sich mediante. 
a    cure — nojt    htle   to    be    commended — askeb,    bat  ne 
binge's  y-kept  bat  ow  to   be  kepte,  and  y-lefte  bat   ow 28  to  be  lefte,  as  it  is  seyde,  I  shal   mow  bryng    bis  cure 
to  a  loueable  ende  and  heleful.'     And  ban   acorde  bay  Arrang-- ments  for 
of  couenant,  of  whi-che  couenaunt — al  excusacione  y-put   the  payment 
5  Q|!0  abak — take  he  be  half  byfore  handej  5  :  And  ban  assigne peracto  J 
medium        30  a  day  to  bo  pacient  when  he  will  bygynne.     In  be  mene 
manibus  tyme,  forsofe,  ordeyne  be  leche  redy  his  medicynes  and 
txcusatione         his  instrumentis  :    bat  is  to    sey   bat  he   haue   first  two proposita. 
spongiej  or  bre  at  be  lest,  &  a  rasour  or  a  ful  sharp 
36  launcet,  and  ober  instrumentis  named  afore,  as  Sequere  Prepara- 
me,  Acum   rostratam,   Tendiculum ;    And    silke   bredes,  operation. 
and  lyn  cloutes,  and  girdellej,  and  ober  bat  ar  seid  afore 
and  to  be  seid  here-after.  Haue  he  also  redy  a  medicyne 
40  restrictyue  of  blode,  and  warme  or  leuke  watre,  and  all 


16 
Choice  of 
a  day  for 
operating. 
A  method 
for  finding 
the  position of  the  moon 
on  any  given day  by 
means  of 
the  calendar 
and  the 
table. 
The  best 
sstrologers declare  that 
no  opera- tion, not 
even  bleed- 
ing, should be  under- taken whilst 
the  moon  is 
in  the  sign 
governing 
the  pnrt  to 
be  operated 
upon. 
1  Ptolo- m»us, 
2  Pythag- 
oras. 
The  Influence  of  the  Moon  and  Planets  on  Operating. 
opir  necesariej,  pat  no-ping  wante  pat  the  leche  may 
nede  in  his  wirchyng.  And  oner  al  this  it  is  best  & 
most  sikir  pat  he  kutte  no$t  in  pe  lure  ne  do  no  violence 
ne  greuousnes  to  it  in  pe  tyine  pat  pe  mone  is  in  Scorpion,  4 
or  Libra,  or  sagittari?^,  for  pan  of  astronomye}  is  forbede 
per  kuttyng.  ffor  as  wille  soue?-ayne  astrononiiej  and 
astrologiens,  pat  is  to  sey  Ptholoniews,1  Pictagoras,2  Basis, 
and  Haly,  £c.  A  cyrurgien  ow  no^t  for  to  kutte  or  brenne  8 
in  any  membre  of  a  mannes  body,  ne  do  fleobotoinye 
whiles  pe  mone  is  in  a  signe  gouernyng  or  tokenyng 
pat  membre.3 
3  The  Latin  texts  contain  a  chapter  headed 
Nota  de  cognitione  signorum  Lunae.  1 2 
Si  quis  scire  et  invenire  voluerit  in  quo  signo  cceli  fuerit  Luna 
omni  die,  primo  sciat  signum  in  quo  Luna  soli  conjungatur  et 
diem  conjunctionis  per  kalendarium.  Quo  invento  tune  scias 
quod  ab  ilia  hora  diei  vel  noctis  in  qua  fuerit  conjunctio  usque  16 
ad  talem  lioram  diei  sequentis  completur,  prima  dies  Lune. 
Postea  computa  quot  sunt  dies  ab  imprimatione  prsedicta  usque 
ad  diem  de  quo  queris  in  kalenderio.  Tune  videndum  est  in  tabula 
precidente  ubi  inveuitur  numerus  ille.  Quo  invento,  queratur  20 
in  superiori  capite  tabulse  sub  quo  signo  Luna  fuerit  pr'ma  sub  quo 
recte  descendens  transeas  donee  directe  perveneas  ad  signum  cor- 
respondens  Linealiter  numero  setatis  Lunse  predictae,  et  in  illo  signo 
existit  Luna  eodem  die.  Et  nota  quod  in  ista  computatione  dies  24 
naturalis  ad  meridiem  diei  incipit  secundum  Astronomos.  Qui, 
igitur,  de  tempore  certificari  voluerit  tabulam  sequentem  de  12 
signis  discat  et  agnoscat ;  sic,  incipit  Aries,  Taurus,  Cancer, 
Virgo,  &c.  28 
[The  Table  given  on  pages  18, 19  follows  here  in  Latin  Text.] 
Sicunt  volunt  Astrologi  summi  videlicet  Ptolomaeus,  Pythagoras, 
Rhasis,  Haly,  &c.,  non  debet  cirugus  incidere  vel  urere  in  aliquo 
membro    corporis   humani    nee  facere   phlebotomiam   dum    Luna 
fuerit  in  signo  regnante  illud  membrum.     Nam  secundum  est  quod  32 
12  signa  zodiaci  regunt  12  partes  humani  corporis  prout  patet  in 
imagine  predicta,  ubi  aries  quod  est  signum  igneum  temperate  sic- 
cum  caput  regit  cum  suis  contentis.     Luna  vero  in  ariete  existente 
cave  ab  incisione  in  capite  et  facie  et  [ne]  incidas  venam  capitalem.  36 
Luna  vero  in  tauro  existente,  cave  ab  incisione  colli  vel  gutturis, 
nee  incidas  venam  in  his  locis.     Luna  existente  in  gcminis  cave  ab 
incisione   spatularum  brachiorum  et  manuum  nee  aperias  venam 
in    his   locis.      Luna   existente    in   cancro  cave   ab    incisione   in  40  Lunn  i 
mammis  vel   pectore   ant  stomacho,  et  a  laesione  pulmonis,  nee         cro  bo 
incidas  arteriani  seu  venam  ad  ipsam  directiouem.     Luna  existente        jjUna  , 


The  Moon  in  relation  to  Operations. 
17 
leone  indif- 
ferens  / 
Luna  in  vir- 
gine  indif- ferens  / Luna  in 
libra  bo- 
num  / Luna  in 
Scorpione 
maluin  / Luna  in 
sagittario 
bonum  / Luna  in 
Capricorn : maluin  / 
L.  in  Aquar. malum  / 
Luna  in 
pisce  bo- num / 
in  leone  cave  a  laesione  laterum,  coatarum  et  ne  incidas  in  dorso 
neque  per  apertionem  neque  per  ventosam.  Luna  existente  in 
virgine  cave  in  ventre  aut  in  locis  interioribus  occultis,  nee  minuas 
4  matricem  mulierum  deservientem.  Luna  existente  in  libra  cave 
ne  umbilico  aut  in  natibus  et  hanc  [in  ano]  nee  in  renibus,  nee 
venara  renibus  servientem  aperias,  nee  ventosam  a^ponas.  Luna 
existente  in  scorpione  cave  testiculorum,  virgae  virilis,  colli  vesicse, 
8  nee  aperias  venam  testiculoruni  deservientem  nee  ventosam  apponas. 
Luna  in  sagittario  existente  cave  ab  incisione  femorum  nee  incidas 
maculas  vcl  superfluitates  quascunque  in  corpore  hutnano  existentes. 
Luna  existente  in  Capricorno  cave  in  genibus  et  a  laesione  venarum 
1 2  et  nervorum  in  his  locis.  Luna  existente  in  aquario  cave  ne  incidis 
in  tibiis  aut  in  nervis  earum  a  genibus  usque  ad  inferiora  cavil- 
larum.  Luna  vero  existente  in  pisce  cave  in  pedibus,  nee  venam 
aperias  in  eorum  extremitatibus.1 
A  note  on  the  recognition  of  the  Signs  of  the  Moon. 
16      If  any  one  wishes  to  know  and  to  discover  in  which  sign  of  the    The  influ- 
heaven  the  moon  is  on  any  day,   he  must  first  discover  in  the    Moon  on  the 
almanac  the  sign  in  which  the  Moon  is  in  conjunction  with  the    body- 
Sun  and  the  day  of  the  conjunction.     When  this  is  found  you  know 
20  the  first  day  of  the  moon  because  it  is  from  that  hour  of  the  day 
or  night  when  the  conjunction  occurs  to  the  same  hour  of  the  next 
day.  Then  calculate  by  the  almanac  the  number  of  days  from  the 
new  moon  thus  obtained  to  the  day  you  want.  Look  next  in  the  To  ascertain 
24  previous  table  where  the  number  is  found,  and  when  it  is  found   the  Moon. 
look  in  the  upper  line  of  the  table  for  the  sign   in  which  the 
moon  is.     Coming  straight  down  from  this  you  cross  until  you 
come  directly  to  the  sign  corresponding  lineally  with  the  number 
28  of  the  age  of  the  moon,  and  this  gives  the  sign  of  the  moon  on 
that  day.  And  note  that  in  this  calculation  the  natural  day 
begins  at  midday  according  to  the  Astronomers.  If  any  one 
wishes  therefore  to  be  sure  of  the  time  let  him  learn  and  under- 
32  stand  the  following  table  of  the  12  signs.  It  begins  thus — Aries, 
Taurus,  Cancer,  Virgo,  &c. 
[The  table  is  given  on  pp.  18  arid  19..] 
The   highest  Astrologers,    viz.  :    Ptolomy,  Pythagoras,  Rhasis,    Tlie  influ- 
Haly,  &c. ,  aver  that  a  surgeon  ought  not  to  cut  or  to  cauterise  any    Moo,,°iiltlie 36  member  of  the  human  body  nor  to  breathe  a  vein  so  long  as  the   surgery. 
moon  is  in  the  house  ruling  that  member.     For  the  12  signs  of  the 
Zodiac  rule  the  twelve  parts  of  the  human  body,  as  is  clear  from 
the  aforementioned  drawing,  where  Aries,  which  is  a  fiery  sign 
40  moderately  dry,  governs  the  head  with  its  contents.  But  when 
the  moon  is  in  Aries  beware  of  operating  upon  the  head  or  face 
and  do  not  open  one  of  the  head  veins.  When  the  moon  is  in 
Taurus  refrain  from  operating  upon  the  neck  or  throat  and  do  not 
44  bleed  from  a  vein  in  these  parts.  When  the  moon  is  in  Gemini 
beware  of  operating  on  the  shoulders,  arms  or  hands,  and  do  not 
1  Supplied  from  Rawlinson,  C  355,  in  the  Bodleian  Library. ARDERNE.  C 


18 
for  finding  the  Moon's  house. 
s 
's 
§ O B c • H O o 
"     § 
» 3 
'S 
^ 
SntJBUUUf I | 
.£ 
5 S 6 c 
c- 
PH 
«J 
1 o o 
d 3 
•     .quiaoaQ I 1 1 
'5 
1 3 
PH 
H O 
1 1 
2 
I M 
2 .quiaAojj 
•- 
2 • 
'S 
3 
M 
a1 
5 
•*< 
H a & 0 
_ 
O 3 d 3 
.qcxiOQ & 
8 02 
B 
'Sb 
0 B 
1 
1 
4 
1 
1 s I c 
oeqinndog I 
•| 
9 
c 
8 
_3 
1 >-i w 
f'~ 
0" 
PH 
0 ^ 
o 3 £ g sn'jsnJJnv Ef 
.= 
& $ B 
J 1 I 1 
snipp O 
o 
te 
E 1 
O 
I 1 
p E 
0 
3 1 
I 
c. 
3 
eniunp S c J 
0 
1 2 
ja 
o 
1 
• 
6 ^ 3 
.1 I 
,™ 
• a 
<D 
s | 
2 
,Q 
o 
I 1 
2 fe ejiudv 
•    C 
1 
1 o 
s c 
3 
o 
3 & 
2 
•n,™ 
1 
Taurus 
Gemini 
o c • * 
§> 
«  c 


Table  for  finding  the  Moon's  house. 
19 


20  Of  Fistula  in  general. 
The  influ-        open  a  vein  in  these  parts.     When  the  moon  is  in  Cancer  refrain 
W?oon°ifnthe      fr°m  operating  upon  the    breasts  or  chest  or  stomach  and  from 
surgery.          injuring  the  lungs,  neither  open  an  artery  or  a  vein  in  their  neigh- 
bourhood.    When  the  moon  is  in  Leo  take  care  not  to  injure  the  4 
flanks  or  the  ribs,  and  do  not  operate  upon  the  back  either  by 
cutting  or  by  cupping.     When  the  moon  is  in  Virgo  take  care 
not  to  operate  upon  the  belly  or  the  internal  parts,  and  do  not 
bleed    from    the  veins    supplying  the  womb  in  women.     When  8 
the   moon  is   in  Libra  refrain    from   operating    upon  the  navel 
or  upon  the  buttocks  or  upon  the  kidneys,  and  do  not  open  the 
.    vein  supplying  the  kidneys,  nor  apply  a  cup.     When  the  moon  is 
in  Scorpio  refrain  from  operating  upon  the  testicles,  the  penis  and  1 2 
the  neck  of  the  bladder  ;  do  not  open  the  testicular  vein  and  do  not 
apply  a  cup.     When  the  moon  is  in  Sagittarius  do  not  operate 
upon  the  thighs,  do  not  remove  spots  or  superfluous  parts  occurring 
in  any  part  of  the  human  body.     When  the  moon  is  in  Capricornus  16 
refrain  from  the  knees  and  from  injuring  the  veins  and  nerves  in 
these  parts.     When  the  moon  is  in  Aquarius  do  not  operate  upon 
the  legs  or  upon  their  nerves  from  the  knees  to  the  bottom  of  the 
calves.     When  the  moon  is  in  Pisces  do  not  operate  upon  the  feet  20 
and  do  not  open  the  vein  in  their  extremities. 
Of  diffinicion  of  a  fistule,  and  places  }?at  it 
is  bred  in,  and  when  it  is  curable  or 
[N] Definition  of    [_  i_>  J  ow  it  is  to   precede  to  ]>e  curyng  of  ]>e   fistule.  24 
rtla'        And  aftir  auctowrs  of  cirurgie,  a  fistule  is  a  depe  aposteme, 
hauyng   oonly   oon   hole  somtyme,  and  ofte-tymes  two 
or  bre,  and  oftymes  mo,  and   bredyng  in  eclie  membre 
of  ]>e  body  of  aposteme  or  of  a  wouude  yuel  y-cured,  28 
Various         giffyng   out   quitour    of  diuerse   colour   and   of  diuerse kinds  of  dis-         ,     .  .  -\  •  .  •,     ,  • 
charge.          substaunce  ;    bat  is  to  sey  now  white  and   Jnnne,   now 
watrye,  now   as  wasshyng  of  flesshe   fat  is   rawe,  now 
clotty  ;  somtyme  myche  stynkyng,  somtyme  litle.     And  32 
Fistula  may  somtyme    be  holes   ar   closed   be   J)am-self,  and   aftir   a 
aftaelr*na(rds     fourtenijt   or  a  monej),  akyng  goyng  afore  in  be  place, 
re-open.         j^  ar  eft_sones  Opned.     And  when  siche  maner  fistules 
is  bredde  in  )>e  armes  or  in  the  brest,  or  in  J>e  costes,  or  36 
psioaneiis.   jn   pe  pies,  or  in    be  knees,  or   in    J)e  legges,  or   in  be 
coi.'i]        '    fete,  or  in  be  hendo,  or  in  be  ioyntowrs  [*of  *  bise,  fat  it 
corrumpeb   oft-tyme  be  bonej  and  fai  ycorrupte   ar   oft 
tvinej  put  out  by  be  holej  of  be  fistule.     U  Bot  fistule?  of  40 of  fistula. 
1  The  MS.  Sloane  6  is  defective  here.  The  missing  folios  are supplied  from  another  English  version,  Sloane  277,  made  early  in 
the  fifteenth  century. 


Prognosis  of  Fistulce.  21 
Juncture^   nojt   comyng   of   outward   cause  ar   called   fe festred 
fistulat  gout.     And  sich  fistule}  almost  bene  all  vncurable,  Festred 
and  namely  in  Wymmen.     In  }ong l  men  forsof  or  waxen  bad  in 
4  men,  I  hafe  scene  few  euer  be  cured,  out-tak  fat  I  haue  sometimes ,      .  .  cured  spon- 
sene  tuyse  or  frise  som  waxen  men  by  long  processe  of  tyme,   taneousiy  in 
fur}  benefice  of  nature,  be  cured  of  fe  fistula  in  f  e  legge}  y°u and  in  J)e  fete ;  fat  is  to  sey  in  )>e  seuent  }ere  or  fourtent 
8  or  two  and  tuenty  fro  fe  tyme  fat  fe  fistule  come  to  pain. 
And  fat  mi}t  be  for,  after  Ypocras,  alle  sekene}  oufer  is 
termyned  after  be  mouyng  of  be  mone  or  of  f  e  son.     H  If   An  acute J  ...  illness  be- 
lt be  after  be  mouyng  of  be  mone.  so  it  is  termined  in  be   comes chronic  at 
12  fourtened  day,  which  is  endyng  of  acute}  sekene}  and   the  end  «r  a 
bygynnyng  of  cronice}. 
If  it  be  after  fe  mouyng  of  be  son  fan  be  first  schal 
be  in  be  seuent  monef  or  seuent  }ere  and  so  ascendyng 
16  vpward  by  seuen,  &c.     *1I  And  witte  fou  fat  al  }ong   'V^66' 
men  hauyng  sich  forseid  fistule},  if  fai  be  in  febre}  and 
lene  of  body,  ful  seldom  abidef  fe  fourtened  3  ere.    To 
which  for-sob  noieth  most  vse  of  milk  and  of  fruyte  and   Mi]^  i™'4 J  and  lechery 
20  lichery.     U  If  be  fistule  for-sob  be  in  a  fleschy  place  of   bad  for  long- 
standing 
fe  body  al-only,  it  is  possible  to  be  cured   and  fer-for   fistuiae. 
fistula  in  ano  or  bredyng  ui}e  may  wele  be  cured, 
z  dnmmodo  While}  neferlesse  it  be  nojt  ouer  olde  or  depe,2  fat  may 
freritn'imh;  24  be  kuowen  by  fe  hardnes  of  fe  place  and  discoloryng  of 
veietprofun-  f6  skymie  and  mich  goyng  out  of  fe  egestionj,  and 
feblynej  of  f  e  pacient,  and  if  it  haue  perced  f  e  waiej  of   Takfl  fare 
f e  vryne.     H  Jjerfor  wake  30  fat  couaitise  blynde  nojt   o^rate  for 
3  vigiiate      28  be  sijt  of  ^our  eijen,3  fat  it  may  no^t  deme  atuix  curable   the  fee  only, 
cupid^tas  and  vncurable. oculorum 
aciem  ex- 
Of  a  maner  of  wirchyng  in  fistula  in  ano  and 
be  curying  fer-of. 
32  When    for-sof   thou    knowej     fat   he    fat    haf    fistule   Selection  of 
in   fe   lure,  or    nij    biside,  is  strong  and   fe    place    of 
fe  sekenej    wele  colored  and    fat   the  pacient    is   gode 
lierted  and  abydyng,  it  is   no^t  to  drede  fat-ne  fe  lech 
36  schal   spede   wele   in   fe   cure  of   it   if   he   be   experte. 
IT  Which    perceyued,   when  fe  pacient  and  fe  lech   ar 
1  Jong  written  above,  olde  dc/<t«l. 


22. Details  of  an  Operation  for  Fistula. 
To  be  taken 
to  the  oper- ating room. 
Advice  to 
patient  at 
[*  leaf  67] 
time  of  oper- ation to  be 
brave  and 
obedient. 
Patient  to 
be  in  a  good light ; 
position  to be  adjusted. 
The  leech's mate  to  be 
told  what  to do. 
The  rectum 
to  be  explor- ed with  a 
Bnger.     [Cf. frontispiece] 
The  fistula 
to  be  defined 
incurable  if 
the  rectum 
is  perfor- ated. 
acorded  in  al  pings,  pan  be  pe  pacient  ledde  to  a  place 
made  redy  Where  pe  lech  schal  do  pe  mynysteryng    of 
cure.     And  all  men  amoued  away  out-take  one  or  tuo, 
fat  fe  lech  will  haue  with  hym  to  his  helping,  oufer  of  4 
his  owne  men  or  of   ofer;  fan   sey  fe  lech  fus   to   fe 
pacient,  reward1   yhadde   to   fe   person   of    fe   pacient. 
IT  '  Witte  jour  gentilnes  and  jour  hijnes,  and  also  jour 
godehertynes,  J>at  J»e  gracious  perfeccion  *  of  pis  cure  ow  8 
not  only  to  be  recced  as  now  to  f  e  possibilite  of  my  gode 
bisynes,  bot  also  to  jour  gode  and   abydyng   pacience. 
IT  And  for-alsmich  be  it  nojt  hidde  to  jow  fat  if  je  be 
vnobedient  and  vnpacient  to  my  commandyngs,  lustyng  12 
f  e  tyme  of  wirchyng,  je  may  falle  in-to  a  ful  gret  perile 
or  tary  longer  }>e  effecte  of  fe  cure.     Therfor  bef-war, 
For  he  fat   is  warned  afore   is  nojt  bygiled.     Paynful 
things  passef  sone  when  at  the   next  folowep   glorious  16 
helthe.' 2     IT  Jjise  things  yseid,  be  f  e  pacient  putte  vp-on 
a  bedde  bifore  a  lijt  Wyndow,  and  be  he  putte  after  f  e 
maner  of  f  e  sekenes  fat  is  if  fe  holej  of  f e  fistule  be 
in  f  e  lefte  side  lye  he  on  fe  lefte  side.     And  if  fai  be  20 
in  the  rijt  side  vp-on  fe  rijt  side,  or  if  fai   be  to-ward 
rigebone 3  lie  he  fan  wide    opne  bof  e  his  leggej    or  f  e 
tone  raised  vp  after  .fat  it  semeth  more  spedeful  and  be 
fai  hungen  vp  with  a  corde  or  with  a   towell  festned  24 
aboue  to  a  balk  or  a  beme.     1T  }?e  felaw  of  fe  lech  sitte 
at   fe  bakke   of  fe   pacient,  aboue  on  fe  bedde  fat  fe 
pacient  lief  in,  and  hold  fast  with  his  handej  fe  ouer 
buttoke  in  raisyng  it  vpward  pat  fe  lech  may  haue  gode  28 
sijt  in  his  wyrchyng.     1T  Jjan  at  first  putte  the  leche  f  e 
schewyng  4  fynger  of  his  left  hande  enoynted  with  oile,  or 
som  oyntment,  in-to  fe  lure  of  fe  pacient.     Which  ydo 
with  fe  tother  hand  putte  he  fe  heued  of  fe  instrument  32 
fat   is    called   sequere   me   in-to   fe   hole   of  fe   fistule 
*  fat  is  next  to  f  e  lure,  if  f  er  be  many  hole},  and  assay 
bisily  on  f  e  fynger  beyng  in  f  e  lure  if  he  fele  with  it 
the    instrument   or   fynger   with-out    any    ping    atuix.  35 
Which  if  byfall  witte  he  with-out  clout  pat  pe  longaon 
is   persed.     IT   And   pan   witte   he   for    certayn  fat    it 
byhouef  nojt  to  cure  fe  pacient  with  no  cure  bot  cuttyng 
with  yren,  or  fretyng  with  a  threde  strengely  yfestned.  40 
1  habito 
respectu  ad 
personam 
patientis  ; 
"sciat 
generositas vestra  et 
celsitudo necnon 
vestra  mag- 
nanimitas." 
2  Cito  tran- 
siebunt 
penosa, 
cum  in  prox- imo salus 
succedit 
gloriosa. 3  versus 
caudam 
spin*  dorsi, 
L  e.  "  rig- bon  "  ejus- dem. 
-i  digitutn 
manus  sinis- trse  .  .  .  qui 
index  dici- 
tur. 
f*  leafCT, col.  2] 


The  Operation  for  the  cure  of  Fistula.  23 
II  If  pat  hole  for-sope  be  no}t  distant  fro  pe  lure  bot  by  incision  to ,        ,  111  be  preferred 
a  nyncn  al-one,  pan  schal  kuttyng  be  pe  moste  kynde  to  the 
and  sonest  cure  ;  pat  if  it  be  so,  pan  tak  pe  lech  Acura 
4  rostratara  and  putte  he  pe  end  hauyng  pe  ei}  thur}  pe 
hole  next  to  pe  lure  pe  lefte  fynger  yputte,  as  it  is  seid, 
in-to    pe   lure.     And   when   he  felep   pe   nedle  wip  his 
fynger,  labor  he  warly  pat  he  may  bring  out  with  his 
8  fynger  pe  heued  of  pe  instrument  pur}  pe  lure  appliyng 
and   wryping.      IT  Whiche  ydo,    be   per   taken   a  four- 
fold prede  of  silk  white  or  of  strong  lyne  or  tuyne  and  it 
is  called  ffrenum  Cesaris.     And  be  it  put  in  pe  ei}  of  pe   A   ilot 
12  nedle  And  with  pat  prede  anoper  single  threde  and  at 
one}  and  to-gidre  be  pe  nedle  drawen  pur}  pe  lure  and 
pe   hole  of    pe   fistule.     Afterward   pe  single   prede   be 
fest  by  itself  no}t  cowstreynyng,  bot  pat  it  go  no}t  out  cut- 
16  pe  lech  no}t  willyng,  par-if  parauentur  frenum  cesaris  be 
i  Sic  igitur         kutte  or  brusten  pan   schal  per   anoper   frenum   cesaris 
geniosusin         mow  be   bro}t   in  with   pe  forseid  prede  with-out   any 
tione  uT^"          anguisch.     U  Therfor  be  pe  lech  witty  in  pis  Avirchyng  The  direc. 20  J'at  he   may  do,  and  kon  do,  tuo  things  pan   he  fyndep 
in  wrytyngs,  *For  al  pings  pat  ow  to  be  done  about  sich  *™**l£ 
qua  ci'rca*         werk  may  no$t  be  expressed  in  lettre},  and  perfor  it  by-  col.  i]  ' fieri  detent         houep  a  crafty  [lech]  to  be  wise  and  sly}e  wele  ymagynyng  leech  may 
StterisS|x.nt  24  subtile   pings,   pat   in   pose   pings    pat    pertenep    to    pe  he  have  the 
Pdeooportet        perfitenes  of  pis  werk  and  aboue   po   pings  pat  he  has 
"rovide^-6838      lerned  in  pis  boke  he  may  availe  hym  pur}  benefice  of 
tem  sub-  hjs  ovne  witte  ;  For  Boecius  seith  51  De  disciplina  scolar- tiha  bene 
iiaaginan-     9S  {um    He  is  of  moste  wreched  witte  pat  euer  more  vsep tern,  ut  in      ^°  ' 
his  qtiie  ad          pings  vfounden  and  no?t  things  to  be  founden.1     U  ber- hujus  opens  J  ' 
perfectio-  for  pe  frene  and   pe   prede   ydrawen,  as  it  is  seid,  pan 
nent  super         may  pou  chese  wheper  pou  will  kutte  it  or  fret  it  with 
hpciibeiio    o0  pe  pred.     51  Iff  thou  will  kutte  it  pan  schalt  pou  take 
"          acum  rostratam  and]  2  putte  it  pur}  pe  midde}  of  pe  lengpe     [leaf  147] ere.          of  pe  instrument  pat  is  called  tendiculum,  bygynnyng  at  pe  The  rure  of 
s^de       gretter  ende.     After  take  bope  pe  endes  of  freni  cesaris,   ^^gby 
rluni,"  35  drawen  pur}  pe  middes  of  pe  lure  and  of  pe  hole  of  pe 
fistule,  and  pur}  pe  middis  of  pe  hole  of  pe  instrument  pat  The  ^  of 
is  called  vertile—  a  wraiste—  .     Be  pai  drawen  pur},  and  l 
be  pai  faste  y-knettid  in  proporcionyng  pe  lengpe  of  pe 
2  MS.  Sloane  6,  leaf  147,  continues. 


24  Staunching  the  Blood  after  Operation. 
freni  cesaris  as  it  bihoueth,  pat  is  after  pe  distance  of  be 
hole  of  J?e  tendiculi  to  pe  hole  of  pe  fistule ;  fan  take  be 
tendicule  and  putte  pe  snowte  of  pe  nedle  in  pe  hole  of  pe 
which  is  to     fistule  in-puttyng  it  strongly.     Aftirward  take  pe  wraiste  4 be  tightened  J    '  &  J. 
by  the  wip  freno  cesaris,  and  put  it  in  pe  hole  of  pe  tendicule, 
fat  is  pe  side  of  it ;  whiche  y-putte  in,  putte  pi  fynger  in 
pe  lure,  and  wip  pe  toper  hand  prist  faste  pe  tendicule 
with  pe  snowt  toward  py  fynger.     And  when   pou  see}  8 
tyme,  be  pe  wraist  turned  aboute  pat  frenu??^  cesaris  hold 
fast  J>e  tendicule  pat  it  go  no^t  out.     And  so  labour  pe 
The  end  of     leche  vnto  pat  he  bringe  out  be  poynt  of  be  snowte  by the  snowted 
needle  to  be    pe    middes   of    be  lure ;    and  pat    he    streyne   fast   pe  1 2 
the  hole  in     flesshe  festned  in  pe  frene  wip  pe  wraiste  and  pe  frene. 
protector  to  Whiche  y-do,  take  pe  instrument  pat  is  called  coclear — 
^jur'Ao  the  a  spone — Of  whiche  pe  holow  heued  be  putte  in  pe  lure 
the*fl»tuia 8    agayn  pe  poynt  of  pe  snowte,   so   pat    pe    poynt   of  pe  1 6 
divided!         snowte  stand  in  pe  hole  pat  is  in  be  spone,   no^t  pur} 
persed,  &  be  -pat  halden  of  pe  felaw  of  be  leche ;  pis, 
forsope,  shal   defende  pe  lure  pat  it  be  no^t  hurt,  pru} 
uncouenable  mouyng  and  sodayn  styrryng  of  pe  pacient,  20 
wip    pe  poynt    of    pe   rasour    or    of    pe   launcette.     As 
soon  aftirward — pe  pacient  comforted — putte  pe  leche  pe 
poynt  of  pe  rasour  in  pe  holwnes  of  pe  snowte  pat   is 
in  pe  spone,  and,  als  sone  as  he  may,   boldly  kutte  pe  24 
flesshe  festened  in  pe   frene  aboue  pe  snowte   euen  be 
pe  middes ;    and  it  y-kutte  by  pe  middes,    pe   snowte 
wip  pe   frene  shal  lepe  out  by  it-self.     If,  forsope,  \er 
be  many  holes  pat  ow  to  be  kutted,  be  it  done  as  it  is  28 
Don't  try  to    seid.     Or  if  it  be  nede,  differre  it  to  anobir  tyme;  ffor do  too  much     .  iii  j  ,      i     i    -, 
at  a  time.       in  som  case  pe  tope?-  holes  beyng  outward  may  be  heled 
wipoute   kuttyng    or   byndyng  of  prede.     Of  whiche  it 
shal   be    seid    aftirward,    pan    it    is   to    labour   to    pe  32 
The  methods   staunchyng  of  blode.      ffirst  put  a  spounge   wette  in  a 
the  bieed^ug   litel  warnie  watre  and  wele  wrongen  in  pe  place  of  the 
kuttyng,  and  hold  it  per  fast  to  receyue  pe  blode,  and 
lat    it    abide   per    a    gode    while ;    perfore   when    bou  36 by  sponge 
pressure,  trowest  pe  sponge  to  be  wele  ful  of  blode,  remoue  it, 
and  if  it  be  nede  putte  agayn  anoper  sponge,  or  pe  same 
ordeyned  in  pe  forseid  maner.  And  when  pou  hast 
doon  bus,  be  pe  paci.ent  raised  vp  warly,  and  make  hym  40 


The  After-treatment  of  a  Fistula  Operation.  25 
to  sitte  fast  in  a  redy  place  vpon  pe  forseid  sponge ; 
and  dout  not  pat  ne  it  shal  be  wele  staunchid.  Aftir- 
ward  when  pou  deme^  dew  tyme,  be  pe  pacient  put 
4  in  a  dewe  place  and  pe  sponge  remoued ;  and  whepir 
be  blode  be  staunchid.  or  nojt,  putte  in  be  kuttyng  by  styptic 3    powders. 
puluer  of  boh,  sangius  dracon),  aloes  epaticMS,  puluer 
of  hennes  feperej  y-brent,  or  of  an  old  lyn  elope  y-brynt, 
8  asshen  of  heres  of  hares  y-brent,  *Iuyse  or  puluer  of  L*  !^?f  147> walwort,  &c.,  Of  whiche  it  shal  be  seid  aftirward  in  pair 
place.  But  witte  pou  bat  it  is  nojt  required  bat  al  pise 
at  oonej  and  to-gidre  be  putte  to,  but  I  putte  pam  here 
12  bat  a  leche,  som  wantyng  or  no$t  y-had  of  pe  forseid 
bingis,  may  competently  spede  wip  be  toper  his  nede$ 
or  occupacion.  ffor  why;  eueriche  of  pise  medicynes 
symply  by  hymself  or  medlcd  wip  be  white  of  an  ey 
16  staunchep  wele  blode  per  and  in  opir  places.     But  witte  The  better .  class  not  to 
pou  bat  to  worpi  men  and  noble  it  semep  to  putte  to   have  too 
vi          j-  j  A    1      •«.  homcly more  noble  medicynes  and  more  dere.     And  witte  pou  remedies. 
bat  pe  iuse  of  walwort  or  puluer  of  pe  same,  if  it  be  had 
20  redy,  is  namely  in  euery  medicyne  pat  is  restrictiue  of 
blode.  How,  forsope,  pe  poudre  of  walwort  OAV  to  be 
made,  or  pe  iuse  of  it  to  be  kepte,  it  shall  be  seid  aftir- 
ward. be  medicyne  restrictiue,  forsope,  y-put  to  wip  styptics  to be  applied 
24  clene  stupes  and  smal,  or  wip  coton  wele  y-tesed,  or  wip  on  small 
pieces  of heres  of  hares  nojt  y-brent,  and  with  lynnen  cloutis  put  clean  linen, 
aboue,  be  it  warly  bounden ;  pat  is  to  sey  be  he  girded  on 
pe  bare  naked  wele   streit  wip  a  lynnen  girdel.     After- 
28  ward    haue    he    a    list    of    wolnen    elope,    and    be    it  HOW  to, 
bounden  byhynd  at  pe  bak  of  pe  pacient  to  pe  lynnen   bandage, 
girdel,  and   lat  it  descende  atuix  his  buttokes  vpon  pe 
cloutes  couerying  pe  lure,  and  be  it  festned  fast  to  pe 
32  girdel  vpon  pe  womb,  and  lat  it  abide  so  stille  to  pe 
tyme  come  pat  it  be  eft-sones  remoued.  If  pe  holes, 
forsobe,  be  in  pe  buttok  somdele  remoued  fro  pe  lure,  A  T-band- age  is  best pan  most  it  operwise  be  bounden.     And  pat  pus,  haue 
36  pe  pacient  a  wolnen  girdel  or  a  lynnen,  wip  pe  whiche 
he  be  girded  in  pe  flankej,  to  pe  whiche  girdel  be  hongen 
a  lynnen  cloute  hauyug  in  brede  seuen  or  8  ynches,  and 
in  lengpefals  many  or  mo;  perf ore  be  pe  pacient  girded 
40  pat  pe  side  of  pe   clout  next   to  pe  lure  lye  ri}t  atuix 


26 The  After-treatment  of  a  Fistula  Operation. 
A  well- 
applied bandage  aids 
greatly  in the  cure. 
Remedies  to 
be  used  on 
the  second 
or  third  day when  the 
bleeding  is 
stopped. 
Arderne's own  prepar- ation 
"Pulv.  sine 
pare  "  to  be used  about 
the  eighth 
or  ninth  day. 
[Sloane  MS. 
277,  leaf  68, col.  1] 
The  bowels 
not  to  be 
moved  for 
48  hours 
after  opera- tion, 
[*  leaf  68, back,  col.  2] 
but  the 
wound  to  be 
cleansed  and 
dried  after  a 
motion. 
Unguentum vivide  a  use- 
ful applica- 
pe    buttokkes  upon   pe   lure ;    and  opir  cloutes   y-putte 
atuix,  pan  be  bounden  two  listis  hyngyng  about  pe  pie 
of  pe  pacient.      And  if   bope  pe  buttokkes  bene  hurt, 
ordeyne  he  anoper  girdel  to  pe  toper,  and  be  it  ordeyned  4 
as  it  is  seid  afore,  and  on  pe  same  wise,  ffor  knowe  the 
leche  pat  competent  byndyng  shal  giffe  no}t  litte  help  in 
curyng.     But  if   medicyne},   forsop,  may  cleue  to  vnto 
dew  tyme,  pe  cure  shal  longer  be  taried.     fforsope  when  8 
pou  seest,  in  pe  secound  day  or  pe  prid,  pe  blode  wele 
staunched,  pan  take  pe  }olke  of  a  raw  ey,  and  wip  oile 
roset  or  of  camomille,  or   wip   sangui's   veneris,  or,  pise 
defailyng,  distempre  it  wip  comon)  oile,  and  put  it  in  a  12 
littel  bleddre,  and  wip  anastar  of  tree  ich  day  but  oones 
be  it  3etted  into  pe   lure,  so   pat  pe  wouwde    be   filled 
perof.     And  aftirward  put   aboue   lynnen  stupe}  kutted 
smal  wip  shere},  and  aboue  pe  stupes  a  lynnen  cloute.  16 
And  pan  be  it  bounden  as  it  pertenep,  and  lat  it  so  lye 
vnto  pe  morne.     And  pis  cure  ow  to  be  kepte  by  8  or  9 
dayes ;  whiche,  forsope,  y-fulfilled,  panne  owe  pe  leche  to 
putte  in  pe  kuttyng  of  my  poudre  pat  I,  lohn  Arderne,  20 
made,  whiche  I  called  '  puluer  sine  pari,'  an[d]  on  frenssh, 
'  poudre   saun}    pere.'      I  wist  neuer,  forsope,  ne   knew 
poudre  like  to  it,  Of  whiche  it  shal  be  seid  aftirward  in 
his  place.1     Aboue  pe  poudre,  forsop,  put  coton  or  stupe}  24 
and  bynd  it. .    U  And  so  by  tuo  hole  natural  daies  be  it 
no}t  moued,  bot  if  voydyng  of  pe  wombe  make  it2;  bot       2nisiventi 
warne  pe  lech  pe  pacient  that   he    dispose  hym   so  pat       cogerit. 
he  renioue  no}t  pe  medycyne  in  any  maner  in  als-mich  as  28 
he  may  abstene.     Elle}  pe  fruyte  and  pe  vertue  with  pe 
effecte    of   the    medycyne    schal    be    annulled.      If    pe 
pacient  for-sop  may  no}t  abstene  hym  fro  pe  pryue  *In 
pe  mornyng  be  it  clensed  with  hote  watre  and  a  sponge  32 
and  be  it  dryed  and  eft  sone}  be  putte  in  of  pe  forseid 
poudre,   And  be  it  ordeyned  as  on  pe  day  afore.     And 
}itte  be  he  comaunded  for  to  abstene  as  afore,  pat  if  he  do 
no}t   eft-sone}  pe   prid    tyme   be    it   ordeyned   with    pe  36 
same  poudre  as   afore,   And  }itte  he  be  amonysched   to 
abstine.      U  Afterward   wheper    he    abstene   or   not,'  pe place  wele  yclensed  and  dried,  be  pe  lure  enoynted  with 
1  The  MS.  Sloane  6  is  again  defective,  and  the  missing  folios are  again  supplied  from  Sloane  MS.  277. 


The  After-treatment  of  a  Fistula  Operation.  27 
pe  fyuger  dipped  in  vnguento  viridi  hard  molten  in  ane   tion  for 
ostree  schell  att  pe  fyre.     And  on  ich  aside  about  the   skin r 
wounde  and  within  the  lure  and  \vhere-so-euer  he  seep 
iNanihujus-    4  pe    skynne    flayne.     H For  why;   pis   enoyntment   dope 
guentum  away  alle  smertyng  and  fleyng.1     And  bis  enoyntment  is omnino  .  - 
pruritum  called  Salus  populi,  pe  making  of  which  shal  be  schewed 
deietet  afterward.     U  Which  enoynted,  be  per  jetted   in  as  by-  An  enema  to excoria-  Q  be  injected 
tionem,          o  tore  with  a  nastare  of  tree  of  fe  ^olke  of  an  ey  and  one.   through  a 
And  as  it  is  seid  in  J>e  place  afore,  be  it  reparaled  in  al  clyster  pipe. 
J>ings,  renewyng    eueryday   one}   first    with    pe    forseid 
oyntment  molten  in  a  schell.     And  be  per  3ette  in  with 
12  a  nastare  of  tree  oile  with  an  ey.     11  And  bis  wirchyng 
be  continued  by  9  daies  at  the  lest.     1F  About  the  twenty  Treatment 
day,  forsoth,  or  24  or  26,  eft-sonej  if  pou  see  nede,  pan  it  day. 
is   gode  bat  pou  putte  bisily  within  pe  lure  of  poudre 
16  sine  pari,   and  fille  pe  place   of   pe   fistule   within   and 
a  et  ut  die-         without  and  as  it  is  seid  be  it  redied.2     IF  When  forsob turn  est  prae-  . 
paretur.  pe  wonde  is  remoued  .  eft-sone^  as  it  is  seid  afore  be  it 
wasched  and  dried  and  be  it  anoynted  about  with  Salus 
20  popwli  And  after  be  caste  in  by  a  nastare  oyle  and  pe  3olk 
of  ane  ey   And,  if  pe  pacient  may  abstene  hym  fro  pe 
pryue,  be  it  no^t  remoued  by  two  daies.     *Elle$  forsop  [*  leaf  69, 
when  it  is  nede  be  it  remoued.     And  considere  pe  lech 
24  bisily   pe  wounde  ymundified  if  it  be  wele  tretable  and 
with-out  hardnes  and  bolnyng  and  yuel  colour:  and  som  The  means 
what  for  to  cesse  pe  superflue  moistnes  which  pe  wonde  tbeCheaUng sent  out  first .  pan  witte  pe  lech  pat  at  pe  next  he  may 
28  putte  to  cicatrizatiues  as  bene  pise,  Puluer  of  alum 
^ucarin  combust,  '  bole  armenic,'  sanguis  draconis,  Aloe, 
mirra,  sarcocolla,  meele  of  barly  and  of  beene},  puluer  of 
:!  puivia  galley  and  psidie  3  and  puluer  tanny,  gummy  arabic,  terra  Many  reme- 
qucrcumn.     32  sigillata,  &c.     U  Suppose   nojt   pe   lech  pat   it  byhouep   ed  but  only 
him  to  haue  in  one  receyte  al  thise  forseid  togidre  for  used, 
pai  ar  sette  here  togidre.      Bot  it  is  to  vnderstand  pat 
pai  ar  named,  here  togidre  pat  a  lech  know  al  to  be  of 
36  pe  same  vertu  in  regeneracion  of  flesch  an[d]  cicatrizacione 
and  pat  pai  bene  al  stiptik.  And  to  pise  may  be  added 
ceruse  and  litarge  of  gold  and  of  siluer.  U  IS  pe  lech 
want  any  of  pern  take  of  pe  toper  pat  he  may  fynde, 
40  For  nouper  it  byhouep  here  ne  in  none  oper  place,  pat 


28  Treatment  of  a  Fistula  Operation  in  its  final  stages. 
Thereme-      al   ]>ings   named  bat   hab  }>e   same   vertue   be   putte   in 
applied  on      every  confection;   bot  tuo,  or  thre,  suffice))  als  mich  as 
Into  small"    alle.     U  Tak  J>er-for  J)e  lech  of  bise  forseid,  tuo,  or  thre, or  foure  and  medle  bam  with  be  jolk  of  a  raw  ey,  a  litle  4 
oile  of  lynsede  putte  to,  if  it  be  hadde,  or  of  sanguis 
veneris  or  of  melle  rosat',  and  with  soft  stupe}  of  lyne  kutte 
smal  or  with  coton  .  be  it  putt  warly  in  the  wounde,  For 
whi  ;  it  clenseth  be  wounde  and  helep  and  dryeb  it  wele  8 
[«  leaf  69,      *  for  certayne.    U  Or  bou  may  put  to  common  vnguentum 
Our  author's  Q^wn   fat  apotecharie^   makeb,  bis  neberlesse   yknowen 
o™hv"tum    afore  l    bat   bou   ow  to   medle  ber-with  poudre   of   bole       J  hoc  tamen aramcum.  r         I  *  pnenoto. 
armenic   and  sanguis  dragonis,  if  bou  haue  it,  and  oile  12 
roset  with  watre  of  rose  in  which  be  resolued   gumme 
arabic1,  and  bj>  it   wele  ymedled   togidre   and  berof   be 
putte   euery  day  in  J>e   wounde   and   about   be   wounde 
with  coton.     And   for  certayn  it  heleth  wele  no^t  only  16 
ber  bot  in  euery  place  of  be  body.     And  bis  oyntment 
wold  I  neuer  want  and  I  calle  it  vnguentuw  arabicum 
of    gumme   arabic   bat    entre]>   J>erin   and   )>an   schal   it 
be    of    rede    colour.      U  And   witte   bou    bat   with   bis  20 
oyntment    without    any    ober    medicine,   outtake   salus 
popwli  bou  may  finaly  hele  be  wounde  of  )>e  fistule,  if  ber 
The  best        be  in  it  no  ded  flesch.  no  *°\l,  or  bolnyng,  or  hardnej,  or sign  of  a  cure 
is  that  the      blones,  or  rednes,  or  any  ober  instans  bat  may  be-falle.2  24  2  livor  a»* dressings  rubor  aut 
remain  dry.    'II  pat   it    ber   be-falle   any   of    "bise   accidente?   why   be       aiiquod aliud 
wounde  may  nojt  perfitely  be  souded  be  ber  put  in  of       instans  quod ,..  .i-.i-i,  ,«.  contingere 
puluis  sine  pan  and  it  schal  bryng  in  be  desired  effecte.        potent/ 
U  And  pis  schal  be  to  be  be  tokne  of  perfite  curyng  when  28 
)>ou  seej  be  linne  cloutej  putte  to  with  fe  medicynej  to 
be  drye  when  )>ou  remoue^    bam.     And  in-als-mych  as 
bai  ar  more  drye  in-so-mych  bai  ar   be  better.      U  And 
bis   sufficeb   of    be   kuttyng   of   J>e    fistule   and   of    the  32 
curyng  of  it.  by  bo  J>ings  bat  thurj  be  bisines  of  a  gode       3Eth»cde 
lech  and  a  witty  may  make  be  forseid  Averk  more.3  iist'uiS"! 
bk.,       Of  a-no))er  maner  wirchyng  in  J>e  same  fis- 
ejus  iunc- tione  suffi- 
industriam 
tule  and  be  cure  wib  diuerse  exemple';.  36  bon"set' -1       **  ingeniosi 
Reasons  for        If  it  by  falle  forsob  bat  pe  fistule  be  depe  and  haue       d'lctum  opus 
curebyiiga-  grete  distance  atuix  }>e  hole  of   be  fistule  and  be  lure.  n 


Other  methods  of  treating  a  Fistula.  29 
Or  if  f  e  pacient  be  ferdful  for  to  suffer  kuttyng.     Or  for  ture  rather ,11  i     .  .  ,     than  by  in- 
ofer   notable   cause}    being  per,  fan   may  fe   lech   \\ith  cision. 
kuttyng   of   fe   frede   ydrawen   thurj  fe   middej   of   ]>e 
4  hole  of  fe  fistule  and  fe  lure  kutte  fe  flesch,   and  fat 
availejj  even  to   kuttyng  with  iren,  outtake  fat  it  askef 
a  longer  tyme  of  curyng.     For  why  :  bof-al  it  be  bounden   T!'e  details .  .  iij.  of  treatment 
njt  streitly  at  f  e  first  tyme  }itte  vnnef e  schal  f  e  fretyng  by  ligature. 
8  be  complete   in  som  men  by  a  monef  or  thre   weke$. 
H  Sich  cure  f erfor  ysewed  and  f  e  festnyng  ydo  on  dewe 
1  Prosecuta        maner,1   pat  is  after  fat  J>e  pacient  may  resonably  suffre, 
cura  et  in-          puruey  f e  leche  if  f e  pacient  be  delicate  or  feble,    or 
debito  modo  12  waike   of    hert,    fat   fe   f?-ede    by   which   fe   fistule   is 
knytte,    be   so   bonden   fat  if   it   be   nede   fat   it  may 
be  loused  without  kuttyng,  fat  is  with  a  lache  knotte  or 
2  Cum  nodo        slyppyng   knotte.2     U  Which  ydo,   lye  f  e  pacient  on   a 
Angiice        1 6  bedde ;  or  stande  he  or  go  he  by  f  re  oure^  or  5,  or  6, 
vnto  fat  f  e  payne  ycaused  of  f  e  byndyng  cese  somwhat. 
And  whefer  fe  akyng  cese  at  fe  forseid  tyme  or  no$t, 
putte  fe  pacient  on  a  bedde  and  with  a  naister  of  tree 
20  putte  into  f  e  lure  of  f  e  jolk  of  a  raw  ey,  medled  with 
3  et  cum  nas-       oile    of   rose   leuke,3    and  be    f  e   lure   wele   enoyntid  4  [*  sioane  6, tare  ligneo  «.    /•     ,  •  ,,        ,    ,.     ,  j  •  leaf  148] 
infundatur  of    fe  same   withouteforfe.     And  so  wifoute   puttyng in  anum  de  j.    •  *  •  •          t    ,       •<       i  i  •   ±  A  method  of 
?iteiio  ovi          atuix   of    any-f  mg  late  it  aloon  by  a  ni$t ;  At  morne,  giving  a 
ofeo  ?osU'"    24  forsof  e,   bifore    fat   f  e    pacieut   go   to   priue,  be   ^ettid   ulean^oVa 
into  fe  lure   by   a   nast?-e   som  oyle,   what-so   plesef  to   ened^nhot1 
fe,    fat  fe  pacient  may  so   moche   more   li}t  ese    hym.   avt^ched'to 
Witte  fou  fat  bus  ow  fou  to  chaufe  ]>e  solk  of  an  ey   the  end  of •     the  nastar  or 
28  with   oyle.     Take   fe   nastare  wif   fe  forseid   medicyne  giysterpipe. 
putte  in  fe  bledder,  and  fe  bledder  putte  in  some  vessell 
wif  hote   water,  fat  fe  medicyne  may   be   chauffed  by 
f  e  hete   of   f  e  watre ;    ffor  why  ;  hote  f  ing  esef  better 
32  fe  akyng.  Jjan  afore  fe  pacient  go  to  fe  priue,  take 
fe  leche  fe  forseid  frede  in  fe  lure,  and  be  fe  vtter 
knotte  loused,  and  aftir  be  fe  frede  more  strongly  con- 
streyned  if  it  may  wifout  anguissh  of  fe  pacient. 
36  Ellej,  forsofe,  be  it  bounden  wif  tuo  knottis  or  fre 
vnlouseable,  and  be  fe  heuedej  of  f  e  f  rede}  kutte  away 
so  nere  fe  knotte  fat  fai  may  nojt  be  perceyued  of  fe 
pacient  or  of  ofer  men.  And  witte  fou  fat  fe  leche 
4  Sioane  6,  leaf  148,  continues. 


30  Prescriptions  for  some  good  Clysters. 
The  leech  to   shuld    haue   euermore   brede  of  white    silke,   small   and keep  a  stock  .  <•    i        i  •>        i 
of  ligature     strong  ;    if  he  haue  no^t,  iorsope,  fan   take   he   strong 
material,  ~  .  «  A.  '    i_«         •  "i 
and  to  be       brede  of  lyne  or  or  tuyne.    And  in  no  maner  aite?1  his  raijt 
to'iteep'his     shewe   he  no$t  his  wirkyng,  nouper  in  kuttyng  ne  wip  4 
secret.  *        brede  byndyng,  pat  his  werke  be  perceyued  of   strange 
men,  pat  his  cure  be  nojt  litle  sette  by,  or  bat  any  oper 
witty  man  perceyuyng  his  work  mow  vsurpe  it  to  hym- 
self  ;  for  bus  did  I,  perfore  wake  30,  for  he  bat  is  warned  8 
aforne   is   nojt    bigiled.     It  byhouep  a  leche  vse  many 
cautelej,  pat  he  adowrne1  his  faculte,  which  e  I  may  noat       J  ntfacui- J  tatem  suan: 
note   to    pe    laste.     It   seemep,  forsope,    vnworpi  for  to       decoret. 
vse    wele    pingis  y-giffe   pat   kan   no^t   gette   hym   mo  12 
pingis.      j?e?'fore    when    pe    pacient    has     clensed     his 
wombe,  be  he  putte  vpon  a  bedde,  and  be  his  lure  wele 
clensed   and   wyped   wip   hote  watre  and  wip  a  sponge. 
Aftirward    be    it    enoynted    wip    pi    fynger    atuix    pe  16 
buttokej   and  on    ich    aside    about  be  lure    wip    Salus 
A  prescrip-     popztli  hette  in  an  ostree  shell.     Aftirward  be  per  jetted tionfora  ... 
good  clyster,   \\\    by    a   nastare  pe  jolk  of   an  ey  as   aboue  wip   oile. 
Aftirward    be    per   putte    aboue    siche  ane  Emplastre  :  20 
Recipe  —  pe    luyse    of     smalache    or    merch,    wormode, 
Molayne,  walworte,  Sparge,  waybrede,  Mugworte,  auance, 
petite   consoude,  wodbynd.     Of  alle  pise  herbes,  if  pou 
may  haue  pam,  take  euen  porcion,  outtake  of  wodebynde,  24 
of  whiche,  if  it  may   be   hadde,  be  taken  pe  triple  or 
quadriple.     If   al,  forsope,  may  not   be   hadde,  take   pe 
toper    pat    pou    may    haue,   and   namely    pe    pre    first 
named   wip  wodebynd  if  pou   may   haue  it.     The  con-  28 
and  another  feccion)  is  bus  :  —  Take  pe  luse  of   pe  herbes,  and  be  it for  a  plaster. 
medled   wip   als    mich  of    wele  clarified    hony,   al-wise 
mouyng  on  an  esy  fire,  and  boile  tham  so  long  vnto  pat 
pe  watrynes  of  pe  luyse  be  somewhat  pikned  ;   whiche,  32 
y-take  of  pe  fire  and  keled,  kepe  it  in  a  gode  potte.2     It       2  ab  igne i,  ij-ii-ii  deposita  et may  laste  al  one  3ere  or  tuo  ;  perfore  when  pou  wilt  vse       iuirigerata, 
perof,  take  of  it  als  mich  as  it  is  nede,  and  putte  perto 
als  miche  of  whites  of  eiren,  wele  y-bette  and  scorned,3  and  36  3  prmsad 
moue  pam  togider.     Aftir  be  per  put  to  pam  of  subtile       spunats. 
mele  of  whete  als  moche  as  sufficep,  and  medle  pam  wele 
[*  leaf  148,     to-gidre  ;  pan  putte  *  to  a  litle  oyle  of  olyue,  or  of  fressh 
buttre    scorned   at    pe    fire,  wip  als  miche  virgine  wax  40 


Preparation  of  Diaflosmus  and  Tapsimel.  31 
togidre  dissolued  at  pe  fire  by  it  self;  pan  first  putte 
aboue  pe  iuse  to  pe  fire  wip  hony  and  white  of  eyren, 
and  moue  pam  all  wayse  wip  a  sklyse l  pat  pai  cleue 
4  not  to  pe  panne.  When  forsope  it  is  wele  hote  but  not 
wele  y-sopen,  be  pe  wax  molten  wip  oile  or  buttre,  as  it 
is  seyde  aboue ;  whiche  y-molten  and  pe  forseid  pingis 
beyng  hote — pat  is  to  seye  pe  hony,  pe  iuse,  and  J>e 
8  white  of  eyren — be  pai  Betted  togidre,  and  so  euermore 
mouyng  strongly  wip  a  spatour,  sepe  pam  on  a  softe 
fyre  vnto  pey  be  made  oon  body  :  whiche  y-do,  sette  it 
of  pe  lire,  and  it  beyng  hote,  putte  to  of  terebentyne  als 
12  moche  as  sufficep  and  moue  it  strongly  wip  a  spature 
vnto  pat  pe  terebentyne  be  dronken  in.  And  if  it  be 
nede  for  to  chaufe  it  more  for  pe  terebentyne,  loke  pat  it  Be  careful 
suffre  no^t  mych  hete,  for  in  seping  losep  terebentyne  preparations ,  ,,  ,  .  .  .  ,         .,  .  ,     which  con- 
lo  his    my^tes.     pise   y-do,    be   it    yputte    in   a   box    and  tainturpen- ,  „  ,          .   ,  .  ,  .,.     tine  because 
y-kepte  to  vse.     lake  of  pis  and  wip  a  spatour  or  wit/t  heatdissi- 
pi  pombe  strech  it  vpon  clene  lyn  stupe}  and  softe,  and  strength. 
put   it   vpon  pe  lure,  and  aboue  put  a  lyn  cloute  and 
20  bynde   it,  as  it  is   seyde,  in   pe   cure   of  cuttyng.     pis 
emplastre,   forsope,  is   called    '  diaflosmus,'   for    molayne  Theprepara- ,     •  11     t    a  i  tionof'clia- 
pat  is   called  nosmus.     And  not  oonly  it  availep  in  pis  flosmus." 
forseid  cure  but  also  in  cuttyng  of  pe  fistule ;  ffor  why ; 
24  it  helep  wele   alle   woundes,  pof-al   pai   be   horrible,  & 
also  bolnyngis  in  wounde}  and  in  brissures ;  and  it  sesep 
wele  pe  akyngis  of  woundes  and  of  brusours.     And   it  its  uses. 
esep  wele    pe   akyngi's  and   pe   bolnyngis  of  ioyntures  • 28  pis,  forsope,  haue  I  ful  ofte  proued.  I  sey,  forsope, 
pat  pis  emplastre  i-had,  it  is  nojt  nede-  in  pe  forseid 
case}  to  renne  to  oper  medicynes.  And  witte  pou  pat 
per  is  a  naturel  vertu  in  walwort  pat  moste  wele  re- 
32  streynep  blode  of  woundes,  and  akyng  and  bolnyng  of 
woundes  and  of  al  membrej  it  clop  best  away.  Witte 
pou  pat  pat  confeccion  aboue  pat  receyuep  Smalache, 
wormode,  moleyne,  sparge,  &c,  wip  clarified  hony  sopen 
36  togidre  at  pe  fire  and  kept  by  itself  in  a  vessell  is  called 
'Tapsimel.'     When,  forsobe,  per   is   added   perto   white  "Tapsimel, its  prepara- 
of  eiren  and  oyle,  wip  wax  and  whete  noure  and  tereben-  tion  and 
tyne,  and  ar  sopen  togidre,  pan  it  is  called  'diaflosmus.' 
40  And  pus  ow  pam  to  be  p?%oporcioned  : — Recipe,  tapsimel, 


32 Treatment  of  Complicated  Fistulce. 
Treatment 
of  com- 
plicated fistulas. 
Lay  all  the 
openings into  one. 
[*  leaf  149] 
1  solanum 
parvum  pos- sit  haberi. 
2  Naght- sarth. 3  childrej 
Sloane  MS. 277.  If.  70, 
back. 
white  of  eiren — aua  §  iiij  ;  whete  floure  3  iij  ;  oyle,  wax — 
ana  §  iij  ;  terbentyne  3  ij.  And  witte  pou  pat  if  in  pe 
tyme  of  pe  makyng  of  Tapsimel  may  be  founden  a  litel 
pety  morel l  whiche  berep  white  flows  and  blak  grapes  or  4 
beriej,  it  shuld  for  certayn  make  ri^t  noble  pe  emplastre 
diaflosmus.  And  petite  morel  is  called  in  fflaundres 
'  Naghtstach.' 2  And  witte  port  pat  pe  iuse  of  it  dope 
best  awey  pe  pustules  in  childres  3  moupes.  8 
If,  forsope,  ]>er  be  many  holes  parsed  to-gidre,  fan  owe 
pe  leche  als  sone  as  he  may  for  anguissh"  of  pe  pacient, after  )>e  reperacion  of  pe  first  wounde,  as  it  is  seid  afore,  for 
to  knytte  wip  a  J>rede,  as  it  is  seyde  afore,  pe  toper  holes  12 
strongly.     Or,  if  he  may,  pat  is  better  pat  pey  be  kutte 
al  fro   oon   hole   to   an-oper,    acu  rostrata,   pe   snowted 
nedle  y-putte  in  pe  hole,  or  som  lynne  tent,  kutte  pam 
to  pe  grouwde  wip  a  rasowr  or  wip  a  launcete.     Whiche  16 
holes,    *  forsope,  y-brou^t   into   oon,  be    pe   wounde   als 
soon  y-filled  of  puluer  sine  pari ;  Aboue  the  poudre,  for- 
sope, I   putte  stupes  kutte  small,  or  coton),  or  carpe  of 
lynnen  elope.      Aftir  putte  aboue   pe   forseid   emplastre  20 
diaflosmws,  and  be  it  bounden  as  it  is  seid,  and  ich  day 
A  successful   oonej   reparailed.     I  sawe  a  man  of  Northampton/a4  pat       4  vidi  et case.  Till  i   «       v          i  •  alium  homi- had    pre    holes    in    pe    lefte    buttok,   and    pre    in    pe       nem  sc. •i  11  11  i*  i  lohan : 
testicle}   codde,  and  al  pe?*sed  fro  oon  to  anoper  by  pe  24  Coiyn  de 
middej  of  longaon  ;  whom  I  cured  wip  cuttyng  of  al  pe       torn  ia holes  at  oon  tyme,  of  longaon  as  wele  as  of  oper.     Of  pe 
kuttyng,  forsope,   of  longaon,  blode  went  strongly  out, 
for    pe    fistule    was    ri^t   depe ;    wherefore    pe    pacient  28 
swowned ;  perfore  I  putte  to  a  sponge  wette  in  cold  watir 
aud  receyued  pe  blode.     Aftirward  I  put  in  pe  kuttyng 
of  longaon  restrictyues  of  blode,  of   whiche   it   is   seid 
aboue,  and  a  gode  sponge  y-wette  in  cold  watre.     I  made  32 
pe  pacient  for  to  sitte  in  a  chayer,  and  als  soon  pe  blod 
was  cesed.     And  aftir  refetyng  of  mete  and  drink,  he  went 
into   his   bedde   and   sleped   wele   all   pe   nijt,   wipoute 
goyng  out  of  blode.     In  pe  niorne,  forsope,  he  had  hym  36 
wele ;    pe    seconde    day,    forsope,   after    pe    kuttyng    I 
filled   all   pe   woundes  of    puluer  sine   pari,    and   as    it 
is  seid  afore   in    all  pingis,   \\ith   oile   and    an   ey  and 
salus   popwli   and   diattosmws    I    helid   hym   finaly   wip  40 


Treatment  of  Complicated  Fistula:.  33 
iQuiyero,         in   14  wekes.      "Whiche,  forsope,1  as  he  seid,  he  vnder- gintimedi-          3ede  pe  cure  of   menv   leches,  And  suffred  it  ten  acre. corumcuram  .  _ 
subegit.  And    witte     pou    pat    1    saw    neue;-    man    vnder    my 
4  hand  suffice  swounyng,  outake  hym  pis  ;  he  was  forsope 
corpulent   and  waike   of   hert,  but  neperlesse  aboute  ]>Q 
fourty   day   after  pe  kuttyng  he  rode.      I  heled  auoper  Another 
man  fat  had  a  fistule  in  pe  same  nianer   in   all  pingis, 
8  outake  ]>at  longaon  was  no^t  persed  ;   whom  I  cured  wij> 
kuttyng  in  pe  same  mane?1  as  it  is  seid   of  pe  first.      I 
haue  sene  soni  men  hauyng  oon  hole  aloon  1113  pe  lure 
pat   persed   nojt  pe  longaon,  whom  I  heled  wij>  puluer 
1 2  sine  pari  finaly ;  but  for  pe  moupe  of  pe  vlcere  was 
ouer  streit,  first  I  put  aboue  of  vnguento  ruptorio  of  calce 
viue  &  sape  for  to  large  pe  moupe  of  the  fistule  ;  of  whiche 
it  shal  be  treted  afterward  among  oJnV  confeccions.  I  haue  Cases  of 
16  sene  som  men  haue  tuo  holes  byside  pe  lure,  of  whiche  oon   many  open- 
persed  pe  longaon  and  pe  toper  persed  in  no  place,  but  it 
was  oonly  symple  by  itself  in  ]>e  flesshe,  hauyng  no  pass- 
yng  to  pe  tot7ier  hole.    Of  whiche  was  such  a  cure  : — The 
20  hole  nerre  J>e  lure  was  cured  AviJ>  kuttyng  or  byndyng ; 
]>e  toper,  forsope,  Avijj  poudre  sine  pare  y-put  in  and 
diaflosmo,  and  oon  emplastre  pat  is  called  2Jeyrbone  put 
aboue,  whos  confeccion)  shal  be  shewed  aftirwarde.  I  saw 
24  also,  and,  oure  lord  beyng  mene,  I  heled  pe?-fitely  a  man 
pat  had  ffistula  in  ano  on  pe  ri^t  side  and  on  pe  lefte 
side ;  whiche,  forsope,  had  on  pe  lefte  buttok  8  holej,  and 
pre  in  pe  ri^t  buttok ;  and  wipin  was  longaon  persed 
28  toward  pe  rijt  side  oonly.  But  neperlesse  all  pe  holes  of 
aiper  pa?fty  of  pe  lure  answered  togidre  in  pe  grounde 
pat  was  proued  pus.  I  toke  a  siryng  of  siluer  and  a 
bleddre  y-bounden  aboute  ful  of  sangwt's  veneris,  and  pe 
32  siryng   y-putte   in  pur^   oon   hole   and   pe  bleddre  com- 
pressed wip  pe  fyngers,  pe  oile  insetted  *  went  out  by  al   [,*ac^* f  149» pe  holes  togidre  on  bope  sides,  and  neperlesse  pe  hole 
of  longaon  answered  no^t  but  to  oon  hole  oonly,  and  pat  A  method  to 
36  in  pe  rijt  buttok  ;   pe  sopefastnes   of   whiche   ping   was   rea?  fistula e ,.,     ..  ii.i'          11  •  i  i     when  there 
proued  wip  pe  instrument  pat  is  camel  sequere  me,  and  are  many 
wip   acu   rostrata,    wip    ful    gret    hardnes   and    bisynes ;   openings. 
pe   cure  of  whiche  was   suche :    ffirat  eue>y  day  in   pe 
40  lefte  buttok  pur}  oon  of  pe  holes  I  jetted  in   sangwts 
ARDERNE.  1> 


34 TJie  Cure  of  Blind  Internal  Fistula. 
Treatment 
by  tents. 
Blind 
internal 
fistula. 
Arderne's operation 
good. 
veneris  wip  pe  forseid  siring  and  bledder;  whiche  y-do, 
I  putte  in  tuo  tentes  or  pre,  or  lard  of  pork  or  swyne  in 
pe  larger  holes ;  after  fat  pe  depnes  of  pe  fistules  asked, 
pe  heuedes,   forsope,    of    pe    tentes    war    tokned    wit/t  4 
precles   drawen    pur}   pe   middes  wij)   a   nedell,    pat   pe 
tentes  shuld  no^t  be  drowned  in  pe  grounde  of  pe  fistules 
when   pe  tentes   war  put   in.      And  I  putte   aboue   pe 
emplastre  pat  is   called  Neyrbon   strecchid  vpon   lywne  8 
cloutes,  and  dewly  y-bounden  aboute   pe   lendes   wip   a 
girdill  and  cloutes  y-shapen  as  it  is  seid  afore.    I  lef te  it  in 
pece  vnto  pe  morne.      At  morne,  forsope,  pe  emplastre 
remoued,    per    appered   aboue    36   emplastre   ful    putrid  12 
quitour  in  superfine  quantite.      Eftsones  in  pe  secounde 
day  I  reparailed  it  in  al  pingi's  as  in  pe  first  day,  and  it bifell  as  in  pe  firste  day ;  and  so  it  continued  almost  by  a 
monep.      When  pe   quitow,    perfore,  bigynne   to  lessen  16 
somwhat,   and   the   bolnyng  somwhat   to   cese,    and   pe 
colo?/r  and  pe  substaunce  of  pe  skynne  for  to  turne  to 
his  ovne  naturel  habitude,  pan  at  pe  first  turned  I  to  pe 
pn'ncipale  cure  of   pe   fistule  with  persyng  of   longaon,  20 
whiche  I  cured  finaly  wip  byndyng  of  a  prede  in  pe  hole 
of  longaon.     )3e   tope?'  hole},  forsope,  beyng  bisyde  it  I 
cured  wip  cuttyng  and  with  puluer  sine  pare.     Euermore 
continuyng   pe  cure  wip  pe  siryng  in  pe  lefte  side,  and  24 
wip  tentes  als  long  as  pay  wolde  entre  in,  and  pe  em- 
piastre  Neyrbon  y-putte  aboue,  and  salus  pop?<li  and  vn- 
guento  arabico,  vnto  a  loueable  endewip  goddes  help  aboute 
half  a  }ere  I  cured  hym,  and  lefte  hym  in  pece.     Also  per  28 
bene  som  men  pat  hap  fistules  no^t  apperyng  outward, 
but  pay  putte  out  miche  putred  &  watrye  hnmowr,  and 
som-tyme  clere  blode,  and  somtyme  blode  y-medled  wip 
quitour.     And  pai  disese  myche  pe  pacientes  and  feblep  32 
pam.     And  oft-tymes  suche  maner  sikenes  bene  toward 
pe  rigbone  of  pe  bak  nij  pe  lure,  pat  pay  may  be  feled 
wip  a  fynger.     But  wheper  pay  may  be  feled  or  no^t  be 
pe?-  done  suche  a  cure  wip  whiche  I  haue  cured  many  36 
men.     Be   pe   pacient   putte   vpon  a  bedde  wyde  opne 
agaynes  a  wyndowe,  li$t  shynyug,  and  pe  legges  y-raised 
vp  and  wip  a  towel  y-hungen  or  wip  a  corde  ordeyned 
to    pis   werk ;    whiche    y-do,   be    pe    lure   y-opned    wip  40 


Sequelae  of  Blind  Fistula. 
35 
ene  alle- atur. 
2  et  prose  - quatur. 
tonges  so  y-shape  fat  when  fe  vtward  endes  bene 
streyned  togidre  fe  inner  endes  be  opned  &  agaymvard. 
Or  if  fe  leche  kanne  ymagyne  more  couenable  instru- 
4  mentis  to  fe  forseid  werk  to  be  done,  for  so  moche  loued 
be  god  fat  streyngf  es  marines  witte  in  godes.  )3e  lure, 
forsofe,  y-opened,  and  J>e  sikenes  bisily  y-sene,  be  fe 
hole  of  fe  sikenes  y-filled  \vij)  pulue)1  sine  pare,  and 
8  coton  y-putte  aboue ;  be  f  e  tonges  warly  drawen  out  fat 
f  ai  spill  nojt  f  e  poudre,  or  pat  ]>ei  hurt  nojt  f  e  pacient. 
Whiche  y-drawen  out,  and  fe  legges  laten  doun,  late  J>e 
pacient  long  reste  or  fat  he  go,  fat  fe  poudre  be  *no$t 
12  letted  for  to  go;  and  abide  it  so  stille  vnto  fat  fe 
pacient  dense  his  wombe ;  and  if  f  e  pacient  may  abstene 
hymself  fro  f  e  pryue  by  two  dayes,  it  war  full  necessary 
to  hym.  When  fe  pacient,  forsofe,  ow  to  be  reparaled, 
16  fan  be  fe  lure  wasshen  and  dried;  whiche  y-wasshen,  be 
fer  ^ette  in  of  a  $olk  of  an  ey  wif  ssa\guis  veneris  to 
esyng  of  fe  ake  fat  comef  of  puluer  sine  pa?-e,  aud  to 
fe  clensyng  of  fe  vlcer  of  flessh  mortified  by  fe  forseid 
20  poudre.  And  f  is  cure  continue  fe  leche  by  fife  dayes 
or  mo,  fat  is  to  sey  of  fe  jolk  and  of  sanguis  veneris, 
vnto  fat  he  se  f  e  pacient  wele  alegedde l  of  f  e  first 
akyng.  "Whiche  y-do,  fan  owe  fe  leclie  in  fe  best 24  maner  fat  he  may  for  to  opne  f  e  lure  and  bisily  biholde 
wifin,  and  considere  if  fe  sikenes  be  mortified  ;  whiche 
is  knowen  if  fat  fe  vlcer  seme  depper  fan  it  was  sene 
afore  fe  puttyng  in  of  fe  poudre,  and  also  by  ofer 
28  tokenes  fat  a  gode  leche  fyndef  more  experte  of  long 
exercise.  In  fis  ferfore  to  be  yknowen  be  no^t  fe 
leche  slowe ;  for  why ;  f er  shal  folow  no^t  litle  louyng 
ferof.  Jjerfore  if  it  be  1103 1  mortified  be  it  eftsones 
32  filled  of  puluer  sine  pare,  and  be  it  sewed 2  in  all  f  ingis  as 
it  is  seid  afore,  wif  fe  ^olk  of  an  ey,  &  wif  sanguis 
venms,  vnto  fat  he  se  efte-sones  f  e  pacient  wele  alegged, 
as  it  is  seid  afore.  When,  forsofe,  he  trowef  fat  it  is 
36  mortified,  fan  it  is  to  turne  agayne  to  anofer  cure,  fat 
is  to  sey  fat  he  take  fe  jolke  of  an  ey  to  whiche  be 
added  fe  half  parte  of  tapsimell,  and  als  miche  as  sufficef 
of  poudre  of  alu??zme  3iicaryne  y-brent.  And  be  it  so 
40  made  fat  it  may  be  Betted  in  by  a  Nastar  of  tree  ;    and 
but  he  is  not wedded  to  it. 
[*  leaf  150] 
After-treat- ment. 
Examine  for 
gangrene. 
Treatment 
for  gangren- 
ous inflam- mation of 
rectum. 


36 Treatment  of  Ulceration  of  the  Rectum. 
Diminished 
discharge  a 
good  sign. 
The  treat- ment of 
ulceration  of 
the  rectum. 
The  applica- tions are  not 
to  be  too 
irritating. 
[*  leaf  150, back] 
Soothing 
clysters  are best. 
pis  cure  be  continued  al-oonly  by  pre  or  foure  dayes  : 
pe   fourpe,  forsope,  or  ]>e  fifthe  day  aftir   pis  medicyne 
done  to,  be  pe  vlcer  reparaled  wip  pe  jolk  of  an  ey  and 
sangm's  veneris  pre  or  foure  dayes  continued.      And  so  4 
owe  pe  leclie  for  to  chaunge  his  hande  fro  oou  niedycyne 
to  anoper,   vnto  pat  he  se  pe  sxiperflue  moistenej   h'rste goyng  out  for  to  cesse ;  pat  is  tokne  of  cure  or  help  beyng 
ni^e.     Jjan,  forsope,  may  he  with  vnguento  arabico  and  8 
salus  popwli  finaly  spede  pe  forseid  cure  aboute  four  & 
tuenty  wekes,  or  more  or  lesse,  aftir  pat  pe  pacient  be 
obedient  and  bisy ;  ffor  why ;  gret  spede  of  werk  standeth 
in  pe  paciens  and  bisynes  of  pe  pacient.1     And  it  is  to  12  i  Nammag- ..,.,.,  .,  .  ,  .   ,  na  operis 
witte  pat  in  all  vlceriej  beyng  wipm  pe  lure,  or  moiste        expeditioin ,..  .,  -,-,     ,        ,.     T  patientia  et 
ragadus  puttyng  out  quitour  or  blode,  pis  1  sey  pat  pe        seduiitate 
viceroy  be  no3t  bubones,  i.  e.  owles,  of  Avhiche  it  shal  be  seid       consists. 
aftirward,  for  pai  be  al  vncurable2  :  pat  if  a  leche  may  16 
no^t  wipoute  grete  anguissh",  als  wele  of  hymself  as  of  pe pacient,  opne  pe  lure  of  pe  pacient  wip  tonges,  as  it  is 
seide  afore,  pan  owe  pe  leche  oonly  putte  in  of  tapsimell 
and  puluer  sine  pare  medled  togidre  in  suche  piknes  pat  20 
it  may  be  jetted  in  by  a  nastare  of  tree.     For  why ;  pis 
medicyne  mortifiep  wele  and  clensep  putred  flessh  in  an 
vlcere.     But  witte  pou  pat  euennore  aftir  pe  ^ettyng  in 
of  tapsimel  wip  pe  forseid  poudre,  pou  ow  in   pe  nexte  24 
reparalyng  for.  to  ^ette  in  wip  a  nastare  of  tre  of  pe  ^olk 
of  an  ey  wip  sangm's   veneris  or  oyle   rosette,   or   wip 
comon)  oile  if  pe  forsaid   wante.     And  pis  cure  be  con- 
tinued  wipoute  leffyng   *  by  pre    or    foure    dayes.      It  28 
spedep  no^t,  forsope,  pat  medicynes  bryngyng  in  akyng 
be  to  moche  vsed  or  haunted,  as  is  tapsimel  wip  puluer 
sine  pare.     Neperlesse  tapsimel  wipout  puluer  sine  pare, 
wip  pe  ^olk  of  an  ey  and  wip  poudre  of  bole  armonic  32 
ful  smal  y-broke  and  medled  wip  oile  of  lynsed  togidre, 
oyle  of  rose  added  to,  or  of  violettw,  or  of  sanguis  veneris 
if  it  be  had  redy,  And  petted  in  wip  Nastare  of  tre,  helep 
wele  vlceres,  ragadyes,  and  excoriacions  or  fleyngis  wipin  36 
2  Nota  de  ulceribns  infra  anum  existentibus.  Et  notandum  quod in  omnibus  ulceribus  infra  anum  existentibus,  vel  rhagadiis  humidis 
saniem  emittentibus  vel  sanguinem,  hoc  dico,  quod  ulcera  non  sunt 
bubones,  de  quibus  inferius  suo  loco  dicetur  ;  Bubones  namque  sunt omnes  incurabiles. 


Cancer  of  the  Rectum.  37 
i  HOC  super-       ]>e  lure;  bis  supposed  after  be  sleyng   of  flessh  putred,1 posito  post  .,     ,      ,  . 
mortiBea-  wib   enoyntyng  of   salus  popwh,  bat   availeth    beste   tor tionem  pu-  .    .  .  , 
tridw  carnis.        certeyn  in  euery  cause  wibin  be  lure  and  wiboute. 
4  Of  bubo  with-in  be  lure,  and  the  impossibilitie 
or  mych  hardnes  of  ]?e  cure  of  it. 
6.  I -tSJ  ubo  is  ane  aposteme  bredyng  wibin  be  lure  in  be 
longaou  wi]>  grete  hardnes  but  litle  akyng.     ])is   I   sey   cancer  of 
8  byfore   his   vlceracion   bat   is   nobing   elles  ban  a  hidde 
canker?,  bat  may  nojt  in  be  bigynnyng  of  it  be  knovven 
by  bo,   si$t   of  be  eije,  for  it  is   hid  al    wibin  be   lure; 
And  berfore  it  is  callid  bubo,  for  as  bubo,  i.e.  an  owle,  is 
2  Buboest    12  a  best  dwellyng  in  hideles  2  so  bis  sikenes  lurkeb  wibin  be animal  late-  J    '  /  \. 
brascoiens.        lure   in   be  bikymiyng,    but   afte?'  p?-ocesse   ot   tyme   it 
vlcerate,  &   fretyng  be   lure  gobe   out.      And   ofte-tyme 
it    fretib   and   wastetli    all   be    circumference  of    it,   so 
16  bat  be   feces   of  egestiones   gob  out  continuely  vnto   be 
deth,   bat  it  may  newer  be  cured  wib  ma?mes  cure  but 
if  it   plese   god,    bat   made   man   of    nojt,   for  to    help 
wib     his     vnspekeable     ve?'tu.       Whiche,     forsope,     is 
20  kuowen   bus :    Putte  be  leche  his   fynger  into  be   lure    The  diag- 
of  be  pacient,  and  if  he  fynde   wibin  be  lure  ane  hard 
bing  as  a  stone,  somtyme  on  be  to  party  al-oonly,  som 
tyme    of  bobe,  so  bat  it  lette    be    pacient  for    to  haue 
24  egestion,  it  is  bubo  for  certayn.     Signes,  forsobe,  of  his 
vjceracion  bene  bise :  be  pacient  may  no$t  abstene  hym 
fro  be  pryue  for  akyng   &  prikkyng,  and-  bat  twyse  or 
quando1'"  J"^86   wibin   ane    houre3;    and    ber    gobe    quitour    out 
addTthe       28  ber-of  as  it  war  medled  wi]>  watrye  blode  and  stynkyng. 
To  bat  also  wele  vnkunyng  leches,  as  be  pacient,4  troweb   often  mis- 
cii^iri!6  '        bat    bey    haue    be    dissenterie,  bat    is    be    blody  fluxe,   dysentery. 
patientis.  when  trewly   it   is   nojt.     Dissenterye  is  eue?-more  wib   The  way  to 
32  flux  of  be  wombe,  l)iit  bubo  gob  out  hard  egestions,  and 
som  tyme  bey  may  nojt  go  out  for  streytnes  of  be  bubon) 
but  bai  ar  constreynod  wibin  pe  lure  streitly,  so  bat 
bai  may  be  feled  wib  be  fynger  and  y-drawe  out.  And 
36  in  I?13  cas  availeb  be  myche  clisteries  lenitiues  of  watre 
°^  decoccion)  of  whete  brenne5  wib  oyle  or  butter,  or  wi|> 


38 
The  course  run  ~by  Cancer  of  the  Rectum. 
Read 
Bernard  de 
Gordon's '  Lilium 
medicinse." 
The  diet  in 
cancer. 
[*  leaf  151] 
The  symp- toms. 
Death  in 
autumn. 
The  favour- 
able signs. 
Be  careful 
only  to  use 
palliative treatment. 
Warn  the 
friends. 
1  in  lilio 
medicinse 
capitulo. 
2  squibala. 
symple  decoccion   of   branne   wipoute   medlyng   of   any 
oper    ping.       Neperlesse     vnkunyng     leches     ministrej) 
vnto  suche  restrictiues  medicynes  of  dissenterie,  of  bole, 
and    sang   dracon),    mastik,   coriandre,   sumac,   mirtilles,  4 
harde  jolkis  of  eyren,  gret   wyne,  and   suche   oper   fat 
availejj  to   restreynyng    of  flux    of    pe  wombe,  as   J>ou 
shalt  mowe  fynde  in 'lilio1  medicyne,'  capita  "  de  fluxu 
ventris."    And  how  moche  more  }>at  pai  giffe  restrictiues,  8 
so   moche  more  pai  noye  to  pe    forseid  in   constipand, 
i.[e.]  costyuenes,   and  in  hardenand  pe  squilullaw 2 ;  pat 
I  haue  oftymes  bene  experte  of,  And  I  haue  lerned  it 
in  experience  in  whiche  I  was  not  bigiled :  ff  or  why ;  1 2 
constrictiues  y-lefte   als   wele  in  diete  as  in   }>e  forseid 
medicynes  I  esed  mich  wi]>  vse  *of  clisteriej  of  branne 
symple  or  of  malue}  and  branne  wipoute  oyle  or  butter 
or  any  fatnes;  ffor  why;  al  fatte  pingis  and  oile  ]>'mgis  16 norisshejj   pe   cancre   and  fedi)>  it.     And  it   is  to  witte 
pat  pise  bene  pe  accidentes  of  pam  pat  hap  bubon)  in 
pe  lure :  pai  may   ete  and  drynk  and  go,  and  somwhat 
sitte   and   somwhat  slepe ;  pai  be  menely    hungry   and  20 
Jnifty  in  mete    vnto  ]>G    ende ;    pai  may  no$t    abstene 
pam   fro   pe   priue.     And  ofte   tymej  comej)   pe?-isshyng 
to  J>am  aboute  auhmpne  or  heruest ;  and  it  nei^yng  nere, 
pay  bigynne  for  to  haue  febres  as  it  war  a  softe  febre ;  24 
and  J>ai  lose  as  it  war  pair  appetite ;  }>ai  bigynne  for  to 
lope   ale  and   pai  couaite  wyne  ;    pai  ete  ych  day   lesse 
and  lesse ;  pai  slepe  vnesely ;  pai  ar  made  heuy  als  wele 
in  mynde  as  in  body ;  and   pe  fallyng  doune   neijhyng  28 
nere,  pai  are  made  feble,  and  pai  halde  continuely  pair 
bedde,  and  pay   couayte   watre   aboue  all   pingis.     Jjise 
perfore    y-sene,   depe    is    in    pe    jatis.3     Xeperlesse    pai       a  H,8  ergo 
may   speke  &  raise  pamself  vp  and  moue   almost  to  pe  32  esT?Amors 
breping  out  of  pe  spirit.    Jjerfore  wake  30  pat  30  putte 
nojt  ^oure  hand  to  pis  but  in  giffyng  clisteries,  as  it  is 
seid  afore ;  whiche  alegepe  mych  pe  forseid  pacientes,  as 
T  haue  be  experte,   and  makep  euermore  pronosticacion  36 
to  pam  or  to  pair  frendes  als  wele  of  dep  as   of  vncur- 
ablenes.     Sich  pronosticacion,  forsope,  shal  worshipe   pe 
bisynes  of  pe  leche :    perfore  fliep   auarice  and   abstene 
3ow  fro  false  byliestis.    Witte  pou  pat  pe  fyngef  y-putte  40 
januis. 


Cancer  of  the  Rectum  incurable.  39 
into  pe  lure  of  hyni  pat  has  pe  dissenterye,  he  shal  fele 
noping  in  pe  longaon  but  to  pe  maner  of  oper  hole 
menne.  But  in  pe  lure  of  pam  pat  hap  pe  bubon)  Make  a 4    ,  .   ,    ,       T  -f  ,  <•    rectal  exani- 
shal  be  feled  a  bolnyng  r^t  hard,  as  if  per  war  an  ey  of  inatjon  to ,  T        distinguish 
ane  henne  or    of    a   gose.     But   neperlesse  pe  putrede,   between 
i.[e.]  rotewne3,  and  pe  blode  pat  gope  out  of  bope  bene   dysentery, 
mych  liche ;  pat  is  pe  quitour  is   citryne  or  3ellow  and 
bio  or  wanne  medled  wip  watry  blode  wip  gret  stynk, 
and  it  gope  out  to  pe  quantite  of  o  sponeful  or  of  tuo 
wipout  medlyng  of  egestion3,  and  som-tyme  wip  egestion. 
But  in  dissenterie  he  shal  fele  fretyng  about  pe  nauyle 
and  pe  flankes;  in  bubon,  forsope,  no3t  so;  but  akyng, 
stirryng,  and  prikkyng,  and  tenasmon ;    pat  is,  appetite 
of  egestion.     I  se  oon  of  Northampton-shire  whos  lure   An  advanced •        -111          •        case  °f was  frete  on  euery  party,  so  pat  he  111131  wipholde  noping   cancerofthe 
of  pe  feces  of  egestions  but  pe  grettest;  Ifor  why;  his 
lure  was  euermore  stopped  vrith  a  grete  towell  of  lynne 
elope;  but  neperlesse  pe  pinner  egestions  went  out 
continuely,  so  pat  his  elopes  about  his  buttokes  Avar 
euerinore  moyste ;  and  pe  towel  y-drawen  out,  in  pe 
stede  of  pe  lure  was  a  rouiide  hole  by  whiche  an  ey  of  a 
dukke  mi^t  Ii3tly  be  putte  in,  and  I  my3t  se  ferre  into  his 
wombe.  Whiche  died  afterward  of  pe  forseid  infirmite ; 
ffor  why ;  he  was  vncurable,  for  pe  nioupe  of  pe  lure 
j  .  wip  pe  lacertes  and  pe  synowes  speryng  and  opnyng  pe 
flcium  luw         lure  was  vtterly  gnawen  away.1     And  forby  2  in  suche  like cum  lacertis 
ctnervis  be  it  done  avisily  pat  couaitise  bryng  no3t  forpe  blame 
ciaudenti-     w°  to  pe  leche.     I  saw  neuer  ne  I  hard  no3t  any  man  pat   cancer  of 
aperientibus       mi3t  be   cured  of  pe  bubon),  but  I  hane-knowen  many   ^™r™Cwlm omnino  cor-  .  uraoie. 
rodebantur.  pat  defailep  of  pe  forseid  sikenes.  Also  I  haue  sene 
spmriginem  som  nauynS  a  ful  grefc  toennyng  aboute  pe  lure  wipout, 
wiem™"  ^  and  vntholeful  smertyng3  wip  ronklyng  of  pe  skynne 
aboute  pe  lure  closed  to  pe  *  maner  of  a  purse,  wherfore  f*  leaf  151, 
pe  pacientes  mijt  no3t  wele  sitte,  ne  ligge,  ne  stonde  euen, 
ne  fynde  reste  in  no  place,  but  euermore  monyng  and 
36  stirryng  pamself  as  it  war  wode  men.  And  superfine 
watrenes  swette  out  fro  pe  place  pat  was  wonte  for  to 
file  many  lynnen  elopes  putte  atwix.  To  whiche  sikenes  Palliative •-,   ,         .  i          ,,          ...  -1,1  -11       treatment 
availep  mien  colde   pingis  in  power  but   hote   in   dede   methods  to 
•*  acetum.        tf\  ,  ,  .  ,  .       ..     i  •  ..be  adopted. 
v  y-putte  to,  as  bene  aysel,4  vinegre,  hote  by  itself  or  wip 


40 The  Treatment  of  Pruritus  Ani. 
Local  appli- cations. 
Fomenta- tions. 
An  ointment 
for  pruritus ani. 
Another 
ointment. 
A  treatment 
for  erysipe- las. 
luyse  of  rubarbe,  or  plantayne,  or  virga  pastom,  or  of 
o]>er  cold  pingi's  in  power.  But  for  pat  ofte-tymes suche  herbes  may  no^t  be  had  redy,  pan  it  is  to  flye  to 
oper  remedyes ;  pat  is  to  sey,  Take  pe  raw  jolk  of  an  ey 
and  rnedle  it  wele  wi]>  pe  poudre  of  bole  armercic  broken 
ful  smal,  or  ceruse,  or  bope,  and  anoynt  it  aboue  pe  sore 
wi]>  a  penne  or  fej>er  or  wip  a  spatule;  pis,  forsope, 
sesep  pe  brennyng  and  pe  akyng,  and  be  pis  oft  tymes 
done  agayn$.  Also  in  euery  remouyng  it  availep  mich 
pat  pe  yuel  or  sore  be  wele  fomented  or  soked  wip 
vinegre  and  watre  y-medled  togidre  and  chaufed;  ffor 
wby;  pis  gretly  euaporeth  noyful  hete.  And  aftir  pe 
fomentyng,  pe  place  wele  y-dried,  be  it  reparaled  as  it  is 
seid  afore,  wip  pe  ^olk  of  an  ey  and  bole.  When  pe 
customable  watrynes,  forsope,  is  sene  to  cese,  and  pe 
pacient  felep  as  it  war  vnsufferable  ychyng,  pan  be  per 
putte  to  euery  day  oones  ane  oyntement  made  of  blakke 
sope  and  poudre  of  bole  and  sulphur  and  frankensence 
ymedled  to-gidre.  And  pis  oyntment  shal  drie,  and  shal 
make  skales  to  rise  fro  pe  sore ;  whiche  y-sene,  be  pe 
lure  anoynted  als  wele  wipin  as  wipout  wip  vnguentu?» 
&\\>um  sharped  wip  bole  and  wip  quik-siluer,  and  pis 
shal  cese  pe  hete  and  it  shal  cicatrice  pe  fleeng.1  And  if 
it  bene  anoynted  wip  salus  popzdi,  it  profitep  mych. 
At  pe  last,  forsope,  agaynj  pe  disesyng  ychyng  be  it 
anoynted  wip  tapsimel,  In  whiche  be  puluerej  of  alume 
^ucarine  brent,  of  attrament,  and  of  vitriol ;  pis,  forsope, 
dope  heste  away  ychyng  for  certayn,  als  wele  Avipin  pe 
lure  as  wipoute.  Or  if  pou  haue  nojt  redy  pe  forseid 
tapsimell,  be  pe  same  done  wip  scorned  hony,  and  pe 
ferseid  pulueres  medled  per-to.  Or  per  may  be  made 
a  medicyne  to  pe  maner  of  pe  forseid  tapsirael  of  pe 
luyse  of  celidone  and  scorned  hony,  to  pe  whiche  pe 
forseid  puluerej  ymedled,  I  haue  proued  pat  it  dope 
heste  awey  ychyng.2  Also  pe  luyse  of  celidone  y-medled 
wip  vinegre  and  Avarmed  at  pe  fire,  and  wip  a  fether 
anoynted  up  pe  foreseid  sore,  pat  is  to  sey  in  pe 
bigynnyng  of  pe  sikenes,  it  quenchip  wele  pe  wickid 
hete  and  keped  fro  recidmacion,3  pat  is  fallyng  agayne. 
And  it  quenchip  wele  herisipiam,  pat  is  wilde  fir 
12 
16 
20 
1  et  hoc  ca- 
lorem  seda- 
24  W  et  esco- 
riationem cicatrisabit. 
28 
32 
2  Pruritus 
3G 
3  bene  calo- rem  noxiura 
extinguit  et 
a  recidina- tione  pro- servit. 


Cases  treated  with  Greek  Powder. 
41 
1  "feu  sau- 
vage." 2  Acetum 
tepidum. 
3  Ulcus 
perniciosa. 
*  bene 
adharens. 
*  ficum  sun- 
guineum. 
or  few  sawage 1  in  euery  place  of  pe  body.  And  pe  same 
dof  leuke  vinegre  2  put  aboue  by  itself ;  Or  vnguentum 
album  sharped  wip  quicsilue?'.  Also  oile  of  citonior : 
4  curef  pe  herisiple  and  wickid  vlcere}.3  Also  pe  luyse  of 
celidone,  imbibed  in  a  sponge  or  in  ly?me  clones,  and 
y-putte  leuke  to  pe  front  and  to  pe  temples,  it  cesej) 
pe  akyng  of  pe  heued.  And  pis  I  proued  oftymes  in 
8  pe  second  pestilence.  Jjer  come  a  man  fro  Burdeux  in 
Gascon  vnto  Xewerk,  pat  had  ane  horrible  sore,  fat  is 
to  sey  peces  or  gobeth's  of  rede  flesshe  and  rawe  in 
parties  hyngyng  dovne  to  pe  lengpe  of  ane  ynch.  And 
12  })ai  occupied  hope  his  buttokes  on  aiper  party  of  pe  lure 
to  ]>e  *brede  of  pre  fyngers  ;  and  per  went  out  per-of 
ri^t  mich  watrinesse  and  some-tynie  blode  wi})  gret 
hete  and  stynk,  so  pat  his  buttokkes  war  cauterijid  ; 
16  and  pei  grew  to  pe  liknes  of  pe  womb  of  a  fissh  pat  is 
seid  creuyse  or  lopster  when  he  spermep  or  friep.  And 
pose  superfluites  partyngly  grew  in  pe  hole  skynne ; 
and  when  pei  war  mortified  euen  to  pe  rotes,  per 
20  appered  holes  fro  whens  pai  went  out.  I  mortified, 
forsope,  pe  superfluities  wip  a  poudre  pat  is  called 
Puluer  greke,  pe  confeccion  of  pe  whiche  shal  shewe 
aftir.  And  for  pat  pe  mich  watrynes  goyng  out  in 
24  pe  bigynnyng  ouercome  pe  forseid  poudre,  perfore  I 
putte  aboue,  aftir  pe  puttyng  of  pe  poudre  greke,  of  pe 
moste  subtile  mele  of  barly  abundandly,  pat  is  called 
alfita,  aboue  pe  poudre  greke;  and  so  I  quenchid  pe 
28  forseid  superfluites  wipin  pre  or  four  puttyng  to,  so 
pat  pai  bigan  to  dry  and  to  welk  and  fall  away. 
Puluer  grek,  forsope,  is  ri$t  desiccatiue  and  wele  cleuyng  4 
to  ;  and  no^t  oonly  it  restreyneth  wele  watry  moistenes 
32  but  also  blode,  and  it  mortifiep  pe  curable  cancer  and 
pe  blody  fike 5  in  eue?y  place.  A  man  had  vpon  his 
buttok  a  blody  fyk  puttyng  out  blode  and  somtyme 
quitow,  and  it  was  like  to  a  Mulbery ;  to  pe  whiche  I 
36  putte  aboue  puluer  grek  by  oon  nijt,  and  in  pe  mornyng 
I  pulled  out  rijt  Ii3tly  wip  my  fyngers  pe  fike  half 
mortified  ;  pe  whiche  y-drawe  out,  blak  blode  went  out 
afte?-.  Afte?-  a  litel  goyng  of  pe  blode,  forsope,  I  putte 
40  to  puluer  grek,  and  pe  blode  was  restreyned.     Aboue  pe 
Recites  a 
case, 
and  its  treat- ment. 
[*  leaf  1521 
Pulvis 
Graecus  an! its  uses. 
A  case  of 
bleeding 
piles 
and  its 
treatment. 


42 
Fistula  in 
the  fingers not  to  be 
mistaken  for 
whitlows ; 
they  take  a 
long  time  to 
I*  leaf  152, back] 
Some  cases 
seen  early. 
Fistulce  of  the  Fingers. 
poudre,  forsope,  coton  y-put  atuyx,  I  putte  aboue  pe 
emplastre  Nerbon  vpon  a  lyn  cloute,  to  kepe  pe  poudre 
fat  it  shxikle  nojt  falle  away.  And  pus,  pis  forseid  cure 
continued,  lie  was  hole  wipin  a  shorte  tyme.  4 
Of  fistules  in  pe  fyngers,  and  hardnes  of  cure 
of  it. 
•  •  [_J_J   haue  sene  oft-tymes  pe  fistule  be  in  pe  fyngers 
and  in  pe  pombes,  als  wele   of  men  as  of   wywzmen  ;  als  8 
wele  of  $ong   men  as  of  olde  men;  pe  cure  of  whiche 
many  men  knowejj  nojt :  ffor  why ;  it  bredep  oft-tyme 
in  pe  fynger  or  J>e  pombe  of  som  men  in  )>e  extremite 
of    pe   flesshynes  mortifying    al   pe   ouermore   iuncture,  12 
fat  is  pe  flesshe  wip  pe  bone.    And  somtyme  it  bredij) 
in    )>e   middes   iuncture,  and   pat   is   more   perile ;   and 
somtyme  in  pe  lawer  iuncture  by  pe  hande,  and   pat  is 
werste.     !N"eperlesse  pe   fistule  bredyng  in   pe  extremite  16 of  pe   fynger  deceyuep   sooner   pe   pacient   pan  in   oper 
places ;  ffor  vnkunnyng  men  seip  pat  it  is  pe  whitflowe, 
whiche  pou  shalt  knowe  pus.     If  per  byfal  to  any  man 
in   pe  extremite  of  his  fynger  akyng  wip  inflacion,  and  20 
when  pat  it  bristep  it  makip  a   litel  hole,  and  oute  of 
pat  hole  per  gop  out  a  litle  docelle  of  putrified  flessh"  or rede,  to  pe  gretnes  of  a   whete  corne,  and  per  gop  but 
litle  quitour  of  noon  out  perof,  pan  witte   pou  pat  per  24 
cleuep  a   fistule  to   pe   fynger.     And   wipoute   doute   if 
it  be  wipoute  help  any   long  tyme,  as  by  a   monep  or 
fourty  dayes,  it  shal   nojt  mow  be  cured  wipoute  lesyng 
of   pe  ouermore  iuncture  wip  pe  bone,  and  perauenture  28 
of  pe   ouermore  and  pe  neper-more   bope  ;    pat   I   haue 
oftymes    proued.      ffor  why;    oftymes   pe   bone  of    pe 
fynger  is  frete  or  guawen  or  it  bigynne  for  to  ake,  pat  is 
proued  pus.     fforsope   I   haue   heled  som  men  pat  seid  32 
pat  pei  feled  noon  yuel  but  by  a  fourtni^t;  *And  when  I 
saw  pe  forseid  tokne  of  pe  fistule,  pan  al-sone  I  departed 
in-als-mych  as   I  my^t  pe  skyn  of  pe  fynger   ri^t  foule 
wip  a  rasour  and  sheres ;  and  pe  skynne  y-put  of,  I  fonde  30 
al   wipin  putrefied,  and   neperlesse   pe   fynger  was   nojt 
but  a  litle  bolned.      And  poudre   creoferoboron  y-putte 


Treatment  of  Fistula  in  the  Fingers.  43 
to   mundefye   pe   corruption   by    al   a   nijt,   and   aboue   ™[treat" 
pe    emplastre    sangwtboetos.     In    pe   mornyng  wlien   pe 
filpe   was   dissolued    and   drawen   out,    I   perceyued   pe 
4  bone  of  pe  fynger  to  be  tabefacte,  i.[e.]  corrupte,  and 
frete  &  loused  fro  pe  toper  iuncture,  and  pat  was 
meruaile.  And  in  som  men  I  haue  perceyued  pe  bone 
corrupte  in  party  and  nojt  in  all  fully  ;  and  somtyme 
8  two  iunctures  vtterly  niortefied  and  corrupte.    ffor  why  :  The  signs not  obvious 
it   is  certayne  pat  bones  shul  no$t  be  corrupte  wipin  a  at  first, 
fourtnijt  if  pai  war  vncorrupte  afore  fat  tyme.     Jje  cure 
of  pe  forseid  is  such  :  If  sicli  ane  yuel  or  sore  come  of 
12  newe,  and  he  haue  had  no  cure  afore,  and  if  pou  perceyue   The  dead 
pe   forseid    tokne   of  fistulacion,  fan  alsone  be  J>e  skyn   benreinoved. flayn  wij>  a  rasour,  as  it  is  seid  afore.     Aftirward  if  per 
be  any  filpe  perin,  be  pressed  out.     Aftirward,  forsope, 
16  be  }>e  wounde  filled  of  )>e  puluer  creof  eroboron ;  fat  y-do, 
be  per  putte  aboute  of  the  emplastre  Sangiw'boetos  wij) 
stupes,  and  so  be  it  lefte  by  oon  day  and  a  nijt  hole. 
Aftixwarde  whan  pou  remoues  pe  emplastre  and  hap 
20  mundified  pe  filpe  y-fonden,  It'  pou  fynde  pe  bone  of  it 
blak  and  putrefied  in  pe  hije  party,  it  bihouep  of  neces- 
site  be  drawen  out.  Or  if  pe  vtter  party  of  pe  bone 
be  losed  al  aboute  fro  pe  flesshe  and  pe  naile,  pof-al  it 
24  be  no3t  blak,  it  bihouep  be  departed  and  pat  alsone  as  it 
may,  pat  pe  bone  pat  is  corrupte  aboue  infecte  no^t 
wip  his  corruption)  pe  bone  pat  is  festned  to  hym  ; 
whiche  if  it  bifal,  it  bihouep  bope  be  drawen  out.  ffor 
28  why  ;  a  corrupte  bone  or  a  lesed  may  no^t  dwelle  or  abide 
in  pe  flesshe,  for  no  cure  beyng  mene,  pat  ne  it  corrumpe 
ouper  pe  flesshe  or  pe  synowes.  Or  pe  flesshe  shal 
caste  it  out  when  it  is  in  a  wounde  or  in  aposteme,  or  in  Treatment 
32  a   can  ere   or  fistule.     }2e  bone  forsope  y-drawen  out,  be  dead  bone  is 
pe  place  y-filled  of  pe  poudre  creoferoboron,    and   aboue   reraoved- 
pe  emplastre  Sangzw'boetos ;    and  be  it  lefte  per  by  als long    tyme    as    it    is    seid    afore.      Aftir    forsope,     pe 
36  emplastre  remoued,  if  pou  se  pe  hole  y-clensed  wip 
pe  forseid  poudre,  pan  be  per  putte  eftsones  of  pe 
forseid  emplastre  wip  pe  poudre,  renewyng  pe  emplastre 
ych  day  tuyse.  And  so  wip  pe  forseid  emplastre,  or  wip 
40  vnguentw?»  viride  lefe  no^t  to  hele  it  vnto  pe  ende.     If 


Treatment  of  Fistula  in  the  Fingers. 
A  means  of 
recognizing 
the  growth 
of  proud flesh. 
Treatment 
of  the 
fistula 
[*  leaf  153] 
by  opera- tion. 
Licium  is 
made  in  this 
way. 
A  case  treat- 
ed by  a  lady 
was  so  neg- lected that 
pe?-   growe,  forsope,   any   superfine    flesshe   in  j>e    hole, 
as   it   fallep  oft   tymes,   pat   pou    shalt    know   pus :    pe 
superflue  flesshe  bygynne   for  to  growe   fro  J>e  bone  in 
middes    of  pe  hole,  and  nojt  fro  pe    sides   of  pe  flessh".  4 And  wipin  pre   dayes  or  foure,  if  it  be   not  niette   or 
agayn-standen  it  passe]?  )>e  sides  of  pe  gode  flessh,  for 
it  growej)  wip  hastines  ;   whiche  flessh,  forsope,  may  be 
drawen  out  in  ]>e  bigynnyng  Avip  J>e  poudre  of  creofero-  8 
boron.      If  it  excede  in  grete  quantite,  pan  it  bihouej) 
for  to  putte  to   poudre  of  arcenek,  or  ane   hote   iren. 
Aftir  pe  puttyng  to  of   pe  poudre,  or  of  pe  hote  iren, 
per   is   to   be  putte-to   larde   enoynted   wip   pe  iuse   of  12 
porres,  for  to  lese  *  pe  mortified  flessh" ;  whiche  y-lesed, 
pe  fynger  is  to  be  enoynted  wip  ane  oyntment  made  of 
sape  &  brymston.     In  pe  hole,  forsope,  be  putte  vnguen- 
tum  viride  vpon  a  stupe  ;  and  euery  day  be  it  tuyse  re-  1 6 
moued,  and  pus  euermore  sewe  pe  forseid  maner.    If  pe 
bone,  forsope,  of  pe  fynger  or  of  pe  pombe  be  corrupte 
in  party  bot  no3t  lesed  fro  pe  naile,  pan  aftir  pe  mijt  be 
pe  corrupte  shauen  away,  and  pan  be  put  perto  liciu??i,  20 
pat  is  carpe  wette,  in  ane  oyntment  pus  y-niade :   Take 
liciu?H,  pat  is  pe  iuse  of  wodbynde,   i.[e.]  caprifoile,  and 
hony  and  poudre  of  white  glasse  ana ;  be  pai  medled  to- 
gidre  and  made  ane  oyntment ;  pis  oyntment  engendrep  24 
flessh ;    it    fleep    pe    fistule ;    it    murcdifiep    pe    filpe    or 
putrifaccion  of  pe  bone,      ffor  why ;  glasse  makep  flessh 
for   to  grow  vpon  pe  bone;  hony  purgep  and  remouep 
pe  stynk ;  licium  hap  vertu  for  to  muwdifie  pe  filthe  or  28 
pe  putrefaccion  of  pe  bone,  and  for   to  hele  pe   wonde, 
and  for  to  sle  pe  cancre  and  pe  fistule.     And  licium  is 
made  pus :    Take  pe  leuej  of  caprifoile  and  brisse  pam 
in  a  morter,  and  priste  out  pe  iuse,  and  putte  in  a  brasen  32 
vessel  or  of  glasse,  and  drie  it  at  pe  sunne,  and  kepe  it  to 
vse.     It  is  pe  beste  medicyne ;  If  pe  fynger,  forsope,  of 
any  man  haue  be  long  vnheled  of   vnwise  cure,  or  of 
negligence  of  pe  pacient  after  pat  pe  bone  is  take  out —  36 
As  somtyme  it  bifell  of  oon  pat  was  vnder  pe  cure  of  a 
lady  by  halfe  a  jere,  after  pat  pe  vppermore  iuncture  of 
pe   bone  of  pe  fynger  was   drawen  out.    ffor  why ;  pat 
lady  entended  for  to  haue  heled  hym  al-oonly  wip  drynk  40 


The  Treatment  of  a  very  chronic  Fistula.  45 
of  Antioche  and  oper  pillules ;  and  for  cause  pat  the 
naili  of  pe  fynger  abode  stille,  she  trowed  perfore  for  to 
haue  souded  pe  place  of  pe  fynger  in  whiche  pe  bone 
4  pat  was  drawen  oute  stode  bifore ;  whiche,  forsope,  mijt 
no^t  be,  for  pe  flessfi  and  pe  skynne  wip  pe  naile  pat 
went  aboute  pe  bone  bifore  war  infecte  and  putrefacte 
of  pe  bone;  wherfore  of  necessite  al  mortified  and  cor- 
8  rupte  bihoued  to  be  drawen  out  of  pe  flessh  and  pe  skyn 
or   pat   it  shulde   come  to   helpe.     Jjerfore  a  long  tyme 
ouerpassed,  Avhen  he  come  to  me  and  pe  fynger  ysene,  first 
I  putte  in  poudre  creoferoboron,  and  aboue  pe  emplastre 
12  Sanguiboetos    in    pe   maner    seid    afore.     Aftirward,   it 
remoued,  I  perceyued  pat  it  was  of  hard  substance  and  it  had  to  be dressed  with 
mobedient   to    pe   poudre;    pan  putte   I   to    poudre   of  arsenic 
arsenek.     In  pe  day,  forsope,  folowyng,  I  biholdyng   pe 
16  fynger  I  perceyued  pat  pe  arsenek  had  wroujt  litel  or 
nojt.  ffor  pe  place  wher  arsenek  is  putte  in,  if  it  wirch 
perfitely,  shal  bycome  bio  &  bolned  aboute  pe  extremites 
wipin  a  nijt  and  a  day ;  Aftir  in  pe  prid  day  per  shal 
20  departe  in  sondre  in  pat  blones,  pat  is  to  sey  mortified 
fro  pe  quik.  But  pat  worchyng  shal  better  done  and 
soner  if  pe  secounde  day  after  pe  putty ng  to  of  arsenek 
be  putte  to  larde  wip  pe  emplastre  sanguiboetes.  The 
24  place,  forsope,  of  pe  forseid  fynger  strongly  agayn-stode  and  touched 
to   pe   poudre  of  arsenek.     ffor   be  place  was  drye  and  actual .  cautery 
inveterate,  or  olde,  in  substaunce.  Jjis  y-sene,  wip  som 
men  it  is  to  wirche  wip  cauteries ;  pan,  forsope,  a 
28  cauterie  putte  per-to,  I  brent  pe  fynger  in  pe  extremite 
of  it  wipin  vnto  pe  bone;  pe  pacient,  forsope,  almost 
feled  noping.  Aftir  pe  brennyng,  forsope,  I  putte  in 
to  pe  hole  pe  fattenes  of  lard  wip  pe  iuse  of  porres ; 
32  pe  second  day,  forsope,  a  gret  quantite  y-inor*tified,  pe  t*  leaf  153, 
flesshe  and  pe   skyune   went  away   wip    pe  naile;    pan 
pat  tyme  I   putte-to    pe  emplastre  Sanguiboetes;  In  pe 
mornyng,    forsope,    pe    poudre    Creoferoboron    wip     pe 
36  same  emplastre.     And  so  aftirward  by  seuen  dayes,  ich  for  seven .     ,  ..    .          .  ,  .  „  days  before 
day  wirchyng  as  it  is  seid,  per  was  }itte  perfore  in  pe  the  dead 
wounde   pe  endes  or   heuedes  of   synowes ;   whiche,  pe  be  removed, 
bone  remoued,  war  festned,  apperyng  wip  a  maner  blaknes, 
40  and   pe    flessh"    mortified  on  pe   to    party e.     Jjis   y-sene, 


46 Of  Fistulce  in  various  parts. 
days  with ointment, 
eft-sones  I  couchid  softly  pe  heuedes  of  pe  synowes  and 
pe   side   mortified  -with   ane   hote   iren,   puttyng  in   pe 
shauyng  of  lard  wip  pe  iuse  of  porres.     In  pe  mornyng, 
forsope,  pat   superflue  flessft   was   remoued,    and   fan  I  4 
putte  in  pondre  of  Creoferoboron  for  to  mundifye  it,  and 
aboue  pe  em  piastre  forseid,  and  so  aft/nvard  cowtinuely 
and  for  nine    by  ]>re  dayes :  pan,  forsope,    putte  I   to   pe   enoyntment 
made  of  liciu???,  seid  afore,  contimiely  by  nyen  dayes.     I  8 
enoynted,  forsope,  al  aboute  pe   fynger  vpon  aiper  side 
wip  ane  enoyntment  made  of  sope  and  sulphure,  and  als 
sone  pe  fynger  was  flayne,  and  put  out  as  it  war  scales ; 
and  als  sone  pe  bolnyng  bigaune  for  to  cese;  pan,  for-  12 
sope,  I  putte-to  vnguentu??t  viride  vpon  stupes,  And  pe 
fynger  bigan  for  to  soude.     But  a  litel  after  pe  puttyng 
to  of  vnguentum  viride,  per  bigan  for  to  growe  vpon  pe 
heued  of  pebone  of  pe  iuncture  rede  flessn"  to  pe  gretnes  16 
of  a  pese ;  and  pat  y-sene,  I  distroyed  it  wip  a  cauterie ; 
And  pan  I  made  hym  suche  ane  oyntement  desiccatiue. 
~R,ecipe:    Sulphur,   auri -pigment?',   tartar.,  alume,  vitriot, sape   and   oyle ;   whiche   ich   day  puttyng   to  oones,  he  20 
recouered  helpe  perfitely. 
and  the 
patient recovered 
perfectly. 
Cases  of 
Spina ventosa. 
8.  Of  fistul  in  pe  ]awe  ioyntour  of  pe  fyngers, 
and   in   pe  legges,  knees,  fete,   &  ankles, 
wip  corruptyng  of  pe  bones,  and  pe  hardnes  24 
of  pe  cure. 
[_OJum-tyme    also    the    fistule   gutte   byfallep   in    pe 
fyngers  of  }ong  men,  and  oft-tymes  of  $ong  wywmen,  in 
pe  lower  ioynture  by  pe  hande,  and  it  makep   holes  in  28 
pe  skynne  som-tyme  on  pe  to  party  and ;  som-tyme  on 
bope  partyes.     When   pe  knowes,  forsope,   pe   holes  to 
be    on   pe  bope   parties,   witte    pou    pat  pe    pacient    is 
Amputation    incurable,  But  if   pe   fynger  be  holy  cutte  away  be  pe  32 
iuncture  where  it   is   festned  to  pe  hand.     If   pe  bone, 
forsope,  of  pe  hand  ni^e  to  pat  fynger  be  corrupte  also, 
he  is  incurable  but  if  it  be  drawen  out.     But  witte  pou 
pat  it  is  nojt  mich  to  entremette  of  pe  cure  of  suche  pat  36 
pe  help  of  pam  be  vndertaken.    ffor  I  haue  but  seldom 


Cases  of  Fistulas  in  the  Lower  Limit.  47 
sene    any    suche   scape  wipout   depe   wlian    pe   sikenes 
was  helped,     ffor  be   fluxe  or  ]>e  rynnyng  per  y-dried,   Signs  of J       J     °    v        J  '    incurable 
or  stopped,   or   staunched,   pai  dye   sone   after.     Suche  flstuiae. 
4  bingia  slialt  pou  knowe  pus :  be  fynger  or  ]>e  hand, 
or  ]>e  fote,  or  pe  legge,  or  any  ober  membre  in  whiche 
is  sich  a  fistule  stynkep  gretly ;  it  hap  streite  holes ;  be 
wondes  hap  hardnes  wib  whitenes  and  redenes;  and 
8  when  be  wondes  he  rennyng  ban  be  pacient  hab  hymself 
miryly  and  glad ;  and  when  pai  ar  stopped  be  pacientes 
hene  pale  in  be  face  and  lene  and  fehle.  Also  it  falleb 
of-tyme  in  be  legge,  in  be  knee,  in  pe  fote,  and  in  be 
12  ankle.  In  be  legge  and  in  be  fote  I  haue  cured  it,  and 
in  J>e  ankle ;  But  in  be  ankle  and  be  kne  also  it  bristed 
out  agayn  aftir  litle  tyme. 
9.  Of  pe  maner  of  cure  of  oon  pat   had   pe 
fistule  in  be  legges  aboue  pe  ankle. 
I  \J  I  on  tyme  I  heled  a  man  bat  had  a  fistule  goutte  in  A  powder 
be  legge  aboue  be  ankle  and  be  fote  wib  be  emplastre  gout. 
Sanguiboetes,    and   wib    a   poudre    bat   is    *  made  bus :    [*  leaf  1541 
20  Rec/^e  auripigment/,  sulphur,  calx  vine,  and  black  sape 
ana ;  be  pai  poudred  and  putte  to  tuyse  in  be  day. 
Aboute  be  wounde,  forsobe,  I  anoynted  it  wib  comon) 
oyle  or  vnguentwm  album  vnto  pat  he  come  to  perfite 
24  helpe.  Also  I  gaffe  hym  drynk  of  Antioche.  Aftir  be 
cure,  forsobe,  I  sawe  hym  neue?-,  perfore  I  know  nojt 
how  long  he  liffed. 
10.  Of  be  maner  of  cure  of  ane  enpostcme  in 
28        the    bu5t  of   the  knee  that  was  disposed 
to  the  fistule. 
I 1  I  Ion  aposteme  come  to  a  man  in  the  bowyng  of  be  Treatment 
iL        -L  i       *  r,i  i  of  a  patient kne,  bat  was  hard  to  breke  for  vncouenable  emplastres  with  an  in- 
32  putte  ber-to  first;    be?-fore  I  putte  first  pe?-to  be  skynne  in  the  ham, 
of  lard  bat  diffieb  wele  apostemej ;  And  nebe?'lesse  after 
bre  dayes  I  mijt  no^t  perceyue  signe  or  tokne  of  rupture 
or  of  brystyng.     Whiche  y-sene,  I  wold  briej  haue  opned  wl"V™ul.d 
36  it  wib  a  fleobotome  or  wij>  a  rasoJir,  but  be  pacient  for-  opened. 


48  Treatment  of  an  Acute  Inflammation. 
soke  it ;  fan,  forsof e,  put  I  to  ane  herbe  y-brissed  fat  is 
called  pede  lyon,  fat  it  mi^t  make  a  rupture  in  fe  skyn, 
for  it  was  to  fikke;   and  in  fe  nijt  fe   pacient  put  it 
The  piaster     away,      Jpan  made  I  ane  emplastre  to  hym  of  mele   of  4 
\vhete  and  of  clene  hony  medled  togidre,  and  I  putte  it 
to ;  &  aftir  fe  second  puttyng  to  it  brest  in  f  e  ni^t,  and 
Tper  ranne   out   f  erof  quitour   wif-out   niesure ;    f  e   qui- 
toure   y-f  listed   out,   I   putte  in   tentes   of   larde  to  fe  8 
lengfe  of  a  fynger,  fat  fe  hole  shulde  no^t  be  stopped 
byfore  fat  f e  aposteme  war  purged.     In  f  e  mene  tyme 
Thedis-         fe  pacient   felle  into   fe  febres  ague},  And  als  sone  fe 
ceased  when   flux  or  be  rennyng  of  be  quitour  in  be  aposteme  cesed,  12 he  became  J    ° 
feverish,  m  party  e  for  negligence  fat  tentes  was  no}t  put  m 
by  cause  of  fe  sikenes,  and  in  party  for  distemperaunce  of 
hete  fat  dried  it.  And  so,  f  e  hole  y-closed  or  stopped, 
it  biganne  eft-sones  for  to  bolne  binefe  and  for  to  gedre  16 
to  a  newe  aposteme ;  f  e  whiche  y-sene,  I  opned  f  e  hole 
wif  a  spature  and  expressed  fe  quitour  gedrid  to-gidre. 
Aftirward  I  putte  in  ich  day  of  lard,  renewyng  it  ich, 
by  a  fourtnijt  and  more.  And  neferlesse  I  perceyued  20 
and  the  in      nojt    bat    be   aposteme   dried   any-fing,    but    more    and flammation 
nearly  be-      more  for  to  harden  and  wax  rede,  and  putte  out  quitore, 
fistula.          liquide  and  watry,  somtyme  mych  and  somtyme  nofing. 
Jjerfore  I   perceyued  fat   fe  place   was   disposed   to   fe  24 
fistule,  for  it  had  ane  hole  or  a  mouf  e  and  a  depe  wonde, 
and  it  putte  out  quitour  of  diuerse  coloures  and  liquide, 
wif  hardnes  of  fe  place  and  yuel  habitude  or  hauyng; 
f erfore  I  putte  in  tentes  anoynted  wif  anoyntement  fat  28 
is  made  agayns  f  e  fistule,  fat  is  f  us  made :  Recipe  auri- 
pigment,  sulphur,  calx  viue,  blak  sape;  fe  whiche,  for- 
sof e,  y-putte  in  fyue  tymes  or  seuen,  I  perceyued  it  nofing 
to  amende.    I  made  a  ventose  to  be  putte  to,  and  it  wolde  32 
no^t  drye ;  f  is  y-sene,  I  perceyued  fat  rewme — fat  is  a 
flowyng  or   rennyng — mijt   no$t   cese,   for   fe   place   in 
whiche  was  f  e  aposteme  is  of  moiste  substaunge.     And  it 
is  to  witte  fat  in  fe  place  byside  fe  bowyng  of  the  kne  36 
Ardeme  has   in  be  ueber  party  is  a  place  fat  hap  no  flessh  but  fat- seen  the 
popliteal        nes  aloon :  As  I  haue  sene  ber  in  dede  men,  ]>e  skyn  of space  in 
dead  men.      f  e  flessh  y-persed  and  fat  fatnes  bene  eten  or  wastedde. 
Jjan  I  putte  in  fe  hole  vnto  fe  ground  a  tent  of  tre,  40 


Treatment  of  a  Patient  with  a  Plugged   Vein.  49 
soimvhat  brode,  and  aboue  I  cutted  f  e  skyn  by  f  e  middes 
wif  a  rasour.      In  f  e  wonde,  *  f  orsof  e,  I  putte  a  cloth  C*  leaf  is*, 
depped  in  fe  wliite  of  an  ey.     In  fe  morne,  f  orsof  e,  it 
4  remoued,  I  put  in  a  poudre  fat  is  f  us  made  :  Recipe 
vert-grese,  vitriol,  auripigmentzm,  alume  ;  Aboue,  forsof  e, 
carpe,  And  aftirward  ane  emplastre  fat  is  f  us  made  : 
Recipe  :  apii,  i.[e.]  smalach,  Mogwort,  Wai  wort  &c.  as 
8  aboue.      And  so  Avif  f  is  poudre  and   f  is   emplastre   he  The  patient 
was  sone  af  tir  cured.      Or  if  f  ou  wilt,  aftir  f  e  cuttyng  a  stimuiat- 
f  ou  may  hele  wz't/t  diaquilon.     But  it  is  to  witte  fat  he  and  piaster. 12  bat  owe  to  make  incision  in  bis  place  bat  he  be-war  of  Beware  of 
L.  n  j  j  cutting  the be  grete  veyne  bat   is   called   sophena,  fat  comef  doun  vessels  in 
by  the  f[i]e  to  fe  legge,  fat  it   be  nojt  kutted,  for  it  Se  ham8  °' 
liggef  ni^e  fat  fatty  flesshe  &c. 
11.  fble  arme  of   a  certane  manne  biganne  sodenly  [leaf  155  (m "1 
bracl?iiXU       ^  ^°r   ^°  a         ^    Pr*k    *n    ^6  ^U^  °^   f6  armel  an^   afterward    hand)} 
gretly  to  bolne  fro  f  e  shulder  to  f  e  fyngers  ;  f  e  pacient,   ^seofa! 
forsof  ,  hauntyng  or  vsyng  fe  medycinej  of  ladiej,  as  it  wa"  treated 
war  by  a  monef,  eue?-more  had  hyniself  worse.     At  fe   byladies. 
20  last  he  sojt  &  asked  my  help.    And  when  I  biheld  his 
arme  gretly  bolned  &  replete  of  redenes  &  of  brennyng  & 
hardnej  &   akyng,  ffirst  I  made  hym  ane   emplastre  of  Ardeme 
tartare  of  ale,  i.[e.]  dreggej,  &  of  malue^,  &  hony,  &  salt,   with  a 
24  &  bran,  &  schepe^   talowe  boiled  togidre  to  thiknej,  &  the  swelling 
streched  vpon  stupej  and  folden  \viih  a  lynne  clofe.     I 
put  fe  emplastre  on  his  arme,  and  alsone  he  feled  alege- 
ance  of  akyng.     }3e  3  day,  forsof,  remeuyng  fe  emplas- 
28  tre,  fe  bolnyng  in  party  was  slaked.  Bot  in  fe  bu$t  of 
f  e  arme  al  f  e  colleccion  or  gedryng  abode  stille,  schew- 
yng  as  it  schuld  gadro  to  ane  heued.  \)e  which  y-sone, 
I  putte  to  ane  emplastre  maturatyue  of  maluej  y-sof  en  and  after- 
32  and  y-brissed,  with   grese   3  daies  or  4,  and  neferles  I  maHow 
perceyued  neuer   fe   soner   for    to   be   matured,  bot   fe  plaf 
bolnyng  abode  mych  stil.      And  in  fe  bu^t  of  fe  arme 
fe   skyne    appered   rounde   wit/i  diuerse   colowrs   to   fe 
2  ad  moduin  36  maner  of  a  tode,2  alwaiej  denying  tokne  of  rupture.    And 
in  fe   ground  or  bothme  of   fat  gedryng  was   felt  ane 
hard  fing,    as  it  war  ane  nutte  rijt  in   fe   bu^t   vnder 
avena  epatica.a     Which  y-sene,  I  putte  to  al  a  nijt  ane 
a—  a  "i.[e.]  lyucr  vayne"  overlined. ARDERNE.  E 


50 The  Sequelce  of  a  Plugged   Vein. 
The  arm blistered, 
•ad  the  skin 
place,  dig- charging dark  blood. 
lard  and  a 
°n; 
it  healed  by granulation. 
Theoint- ments  used. 
The  patient 
emplastre  of  column  dong  l  &  porris  a  &  garlek  y-brissed       J  «»  fimo 
*  .  ?.  °          /  °  J  .  columbine. wit&  pe  myse  of  apu  and  a  gode  handful  of  salt.    And  in 
pe  mornyng   remeuying    it,  pe   place   was   ful    of   litle 
bladders  in  maner  of  pustule},  and  per  went  out  as  it  war  4 
water;  pis  y-sene,  where  pe  sore  semed  pikker  I  putte 
vpon  a  elope  schapen  to  pe  brede  of  pe  sore  ane  vnte- 
ment  made  of  blak  sope  and  sulphure  &  of  arsenec  ;  aboue 
pat,    forsope,  )>e  emplastre  seid  afore,      fie  second  day,  8 
forsop,  fat  emplastre  &  oyntement  remeued,  pe  skyn  was 
vtterly  bristen,  and  \>er  appered  a  litel  hole  of  "be  arme, J 
and  jjgj-  \vent  out  vnder  blak  water  and  hoklyng  in  maner 
°^  8rou^e-      )^an  I  roade  putte  aboue  pat  place  chauywg  12 
Of  lard;  aboue,  forsope,  ane  emplastre  Jms  made.     Jlecipe: 
luyse  of  apii,  wormode,  Mugwort,  netle,  walwort,  hony, 
white  of  ane  ey,  ana,  and  tempred  with  mele  of  ry.     And 
if  pou  may  no^t   haue  al  pise    pings,  pe  iuyse  alon  of  16 
apiibwit7i  hony  and  white  of  ane  ey  and  mele  availep 
mych.      And  pan  bigan  pe  ded  flesch  for  to  disseuere, 
And  in  pe  arme  wher  war  bifore  pe  bladders  euermore 
went  out  droppes  of  white  watire  when  be  arme  was  bare  20 
witA-out  pe  emplastre.     And  in  middej  of  pe  more  wonde 
appered  pappe3  of  gret  flesch  ;  and  euermore  per  appered 
(a  certayne1?0)2  redues  in  pe  skyn.    To  pe  pappe^,  forsope,  I       2  et  semper 
made  sich  a  poudre  ;  ~Recipe  viridis  [seris],  vitriol,  auripig-  24  borirTcute. mewtu?«,  alum  ana  ;    And  I   put   it  to  ich  oper   daie  ; 
aboue  be  poudre,  forsobe,  I  putte  carpe,  and  at  be  last '  r  ' 
aboue   pat   I  put   a  litel   clouth   to  pe   quawtite   of   pe 
wounde  enoynted  wz't/i  vnguento  fusco  or  albo  or  viridi.  28 
)3e   rednes,   forsope,    and   pe    watry    place}    I   enoynted 
wtt/i  ane  oyntement  made  of  blak  sape,  and  poudre  of 
sulphwr;  aboue,  forsope,  a  dry  lynnen  cloute,  whiche  I 
lete  lye  stille  to  pat  it  wold  fall  away  bi  it-self.     And  32 
pan  pat  place  put  away  from  it  al  dry  skynnej  ;  than  ef  t- 
sonej  I  anoynted  \vith  pe  forseid  vntement  vnto  pat  pe 
rednes  &  pe  water  went  vtterly  away.     Jje  forseid  wonde, 
forsope,  was  fully  cured  in  pe  forseid  maner.     Witte  pou  36 
pat  pis  anoyntmewt  is  best  to  al  spotte}  or  filpe}  of  pe 
skyn  which  giffep  oute  watre  and  makep  redne},  for  it 
*  "  lekej  "  overlined. 
"smallach  "  overlined.  c  Obliterated. 


man  was  smyten  on  his  legge  vpon  J>e  shynbone,  A  patient 
Treatment  of  an  Inflamed  Leg.  51 
driej)  mich  and  dobe  away  rednes  in  Query  place  of  be 
body,  out-tak  in  be  ei^en. 
Bot  witte  bou  bat   after  be   puttyng  to    of   be   oynt-   [leaf  155, 
4  ment  fat  is  )ws  made — Recipe  sape,  sulphwr  &  arsenec 
— ber  appered  a  blak  litel  cruste  to  be  biknes  of  a  seme 
of  a  scho,  ]>at  was  hard  for  to  parte  with  be  forseid 
corrosiue}  for  it  was  mich  ritted.  To  which  I  putte  aboue 
8  a  cautery,  i.[e.]  a  bry?myng  iren,  bat  be  pacient  almost  The  cautery 
feled  it  no^t.     After  J>e  cauteriyng  forsobe,  I  putte  to  J»e 
schauyng  of  larde,  as  it  is  seid  aboue,  in  sewyng  al  pings 
vnto  ]>e  ende. 
12  12.  [A] 
but  neberlesse  be  skyn  was  nojt  cleuen l  alsone  after  be  ieg  and  an ulcer 
smytyng.     Afterward,    forsobe,   be    J>rid    day  it    bolned  formed. 
and  bigan  to  ake.    berfor  he  went  to  a  man  bat  haunted 
16  or  vsed  sich  cure  vnto  be  tyme  bat  ber  come  in  his 
legge  ane  hole,  rounde  and  depe,  and  ful  of  blak  filth  in 
maner  of  brent  flesch ;  whome  whan  he  come  to  me  I 
heled  hym  bus.  ffirst  I  wasched  be  wounde  vrith  hote 
20  wyne,  or  water  in  which  was  decocte  )>e  croppej  or  be 
iuyse  of   plantayne  or   sich,  or  in  vryne.     Afterward  I 
putte    to  ane    emplastre  made  of  iuyse   of   playntayne,   Ardeme's 
of  rubarb,  of  smalach,  of  hony,  and  whete  or  rie  mele  & 
24  white  of  eyren  y-medled  togidre ;  or  ane  emplastre  bat 
is   called   sangwiboetes.      Afterward,   be  place  sumwhat 
mollified,   I   putte    to    poudre   Creoferoboron,    -with   J>e  andstimu- 
medicine  of  arsenec  y-medlet ;    aboue   be  poudre  stupe^   powder. 
28  or  carp ;  aboue  al-togidre,  forsobe,  )>e  emplastre  of  apii, 
mugwort,  walwort  seid  afore.  After"  J>e  puttyng  to 
forsobe  of  bis  poudre,  I  did  pe  cure  in  al  bings  -with 
lard  &  wt'tA  oper  bings,  as  it  is  seid  aboue,  vnto  be 
32  clensyng  of  be  wounde.  Afterward,  forsojj,  -with  vn- 
guento  viridi  &  vnguento  albo  and  carp  I  wrojt  in  maner 
as  it  is  seid  aboue  vnto  be  ende.  Afterward,  forsob,  when 
ber  growed  or  wex  any  superflue  flesch  in  be  wounde,  I  He  treated 
36  wztAstode  it  or  mette  it  vrith  poudre  of  creoferoboron  or  flesh, 
of   litarge  vnto  be  fulle  curyng  of  be   wounde.     If  any 
pustule^    wex  in    be   leg    about    be   wounde,    pou    may 
1  "  Broken"  over lined. 


52 Two  cases  of  Swollen  Leg. 
Wounds 
with  swords 
and  axes 
must  be 
treated  like 
other 
injuries. 
Bruises  from 
the  kick  of 
a  horse  or 
from  stones 
should  first 
be  scarified. 
A  patient's leg  swelled suddenly  on 
a  Christmas- day. 
Arderne 
fomented  it, 
and  by  cock- crow the 
patient  was relieved. 
The  juice  of 
marigold  is 
very  useful 
in  inflamma- tion of  the 
breasts  and 
in  whitlow. 
[leaf  156] 
A  prescrip- tion for 
tartar  water. 
cure  pam   wztA    vnguento    albo,    as    it   is    seid    aboue. 
fforsop  if   pe  wonde  be   in  pe   leg   of   swerd   or   ax  or 
sich   oper,  be  it  cured  as  ben    oper  woundes.     If   any 
man,    forsop,     be    smyten    in    any   party   of    pe   legge  4 
violently  and  without  \vondyng  of  pe  skynne,  as  fallep 
oft-tyme  of  )>e  smytyng  of  ane  horse  fote,  or  of  a  stone 
or  of  sich  oper,  fan  is  it  gode  sone  in  pe  bigynnyng  for 
to  garse  J>e  place  y-smyten  and  for  to  draw  out  blode  8 
per-of,     and     afterward     for    to    putte    to     emplastre^ 
repressyng  )>e  akyng  and  bolnyng. 
[A] man  in  pe  day  of  pe  natiuite  of  our  lorde  sodenly 
had   his   legge  gretly  bolned  fro  pe   kne  to  pe   ankle},  12 
with  redenes  and  gret  brennyng,  so  pat  he  my^t  no^t  stand. 
I  (smeared  ?)a  pe  legge  on  ych  side,  and  epithimated  wt'tA pe  iuyse  of  solseqwz,  i.[e.]  marigold,  and  a  litil  vinegre 
putte  perto,1  and  made  paui  a  litel   leuke  b ;    be   which  16 
y-do,  lynnen  elopes  wette  in  pe  same  iuyse  I  laide  warme 
aboute  his  legge,  and  when  pe  elope  was  dronken  of  pe 
iuse  I  laid  hym  in  his  couche ;  And  for  certayn  afor  pe 
cok   kraw  pe  akyng   and  pe    brennyng   was   cesed  and  20 
pe  pacient  rested  wele.     And   witAin  pre  daies  witAout 
any  oper  medicyne  he  was  perfitely  cured,  whar-of  many 
men  wondred.     Also  for  certayn  pe  iuyse  of   solsiquii, 
marigold,  epithimated  bi  it-self  or  \vith  vinegre  destroyep  24 
meruelowsly   apostemej  in   pe   pappes  of   wymmen,  and 
pe  felon,0  and  pe  carbuncle  and  ^ekyng,2  and  rednes,  and 
blone},  and  brennyng  pat  comep  of  pe  forsaid  pings. 
\_A-j  chanon  was  on  a  tyme  seke,  and  when  he  bigan  to  28 
wex  hole  par    was   made   a   grete   gedryng   to-gidre  of 
humowrs  descendyng  doune  in  his  legge.     After  a  tyme, 
forsop,  per  wex  puscele}  brovnysch  and  clayisch.3     He, 
forsop,  putte   pat   he  schuld   dry   pe   pusche}    watre  of  32 
tartar  pws  y-made  :  ~Recipe  tartari  Bb  i  or  ij,  and  putte  it in   ane   newe   erpen  potte,    and,  pe  moupe    of  pe   potte 
stopped  witA  clay,  putte  it  in  a  strong  fire  and  lat  it  be 
per  a  ni^t  and   a   day  or  more  if  pou  witf.     Afterward  36 
tak  pat  tartar  and  hyng  it  in  some  place  in  a  lynnen 
a  Obliterated.  b  "  warme  "  overlincd. 0  "  antrace  "  overlined. 
1  quern 
curavi  cum 
succo 
solsequii 
addito      pa- rum  de  aceto 
et  cum  dicto succo  tepido 
epithimiavi tibiam  suam undique. 
[MS.    Digby 
161.  leaf  22, 
back.] 
2  Pruritus. 
3  pustnlse fuscse  et latae. 


Treatment  of  a  Mormale  or  Ulcerated  Leg.  53 
sacce  or  pokette,  and  vnder  it  putte  a  brasen  vessel  to 
receyue  fe  watre  fat   distillef   droppyngly  to  fe  maner  Thetreat- 
of  lye  out  of  f  e  sak  ;  f  is  watre  is  seid  for  to  dry  pusche}   ulcerated 
4  wele,  bot  nef  erlesse  it  availed  no}t  to  hym.     At  f  e  last,   canon!* forsof,    fer    grow    in   fat   party   of   fe    legge    a    large 
wounde,  And  about  fe  ankles  f  re  or  four  smale  wounde} 
to  fe   brede  of  ane  halfpeny.     And  fe   legge  semed  of 
8  }elow  colour  medled  \\iih  rednes  fro  fe  calf  to  fe  ankele}, 
And  fe  skynne  kast  euermore  out  many  skale}.      When, 
forsof,    he   had    vsed   a  certayne   tyme   lede   or   puluer 
incarnatyue   and  sawe   fat  it   availed   hym  nofing,  fan 
12  he  vsed  a  long  tyme  ane  entrete  fat  is  called  entractuw  Arderne 
i^Quse  titu-       nigruw,1  blak  entrete,  which  is  made  of  white  lede  and   the"caseas Dyueiyn.       rede  and  comon  oile  and  tartarye  «fcc. ;  bot  nef  erlesse  he   inflamed ,,     ,,        . ,  sore  on  the 
perceyued  none  amendyng  ferol,  ior  it  come  to  a  mor-  ieg. 
1 6  male ;  f  e  which,  when  I  had  sene  it,  I  aff  ermed  it  to  be 
a  mormale.     And  I  did  sich  a  cure  to  it :  f  is  is  f  e  cure 
to    fe   mormale — ffirst   sewe   fe   pacient   legge   strongly  His  treat- 
sere'^ihiam          Wit^    a   tynne    clobe 2  ;     After   wasche   Wele   fat    legge    SO    bandaging 
foititer  et     20  sewed  vfith  hote  watre,  after  fat  fe  pacient  may  suffre.   foment!-  '° 
lum   stricte       And  so  after  be  waschyng  lat  it  lye  by  a  natwrel  day,   *  ms> in  panno 
lineo.  fat  is  ane  hole  day  &  a  ni3t,   kepyng  fe  legge  fro  aier 
and   fro   cold,     be  second  day,  forsof,  remoue  fe  clofe 
24  and  muwdifie  fe  wouwde  or  fe  wouwdes  if  fai  be  many, 
and  putte  in  euery   wounde  a  litel  pece  of  lynne  clofe  then  cold .  ,  compresses, 
moisted  in  cold  watre.     Afterward  putte  of  f  e  oyntement 
»  Postea  of  dyuylyne  in  be  circuite  of  f  e  wouwde  3  aboue  f  e  hole pone  de  isto 
unguento      28  skynne  so  fat  it  touche  no  waie?  fe  Avounde?  wttft-in.  & in  circnitu  J  '   ' 
vuineris.  couer  it  \vith  a  lynne  clofe  y-wette.     Do  fus  euery  day 
tuye},  renewyng  fe  oyntment  and  muwdifying  f  e  wounde} 
and  fyllyng  fam  of  a  lynne  clofe  y-wette,  as  it  is  seid 
32  aboue.     bis  is  fe  oyntment :   l&ecipe  coperose,   sal  nitri,  afterwards mercurial 
a  cinens  geneste,a  cineris  b  nigri  testudinis,  atrament^',  ointment, 
ana,  parte  1 ;  viridz's  grec^  somwhat ;  Of  quikke-siluer double  to  fe  quantite  of  one  of  f  e  forseid ;  Of  bore} 
3G  grese  resolued  at  fe  fire  and  mumlified,  fat  sufficef. 
ban  medle  first  fe  ashes  \vith  fe  grese,  afterward  fe  tofer 
poudre},  and  when  fou  hast  wele  y medled,  put  it  in  a 
3 — a  "  aschen  of  lirome  "  overlined. 
**— b  "of  blak  snaile  "  overlined. 


Treatment  of  a  Mormale  or   Ulcerated  Leg. 
and  finally 
La  ri  Crank's ointment, 
though  he had  to  use 
the  knife. 
[•  leaf  156, back] 
It  is  best  to 
cutaway  the dead  flesh  in 
an  ulcerated leg, 
and  then  to 
apply  a powder. 
Lan frank  in 
his  book 
gives  advice about  the 
cure  of  a 
mormale. 
box  and  it  schal  be  blak  oyntment.  With  pis  oyntment, 
forsop,  I  cured  fully  pe  gretter  wondej  of  pe  forseid  legge, 
doyng  in  pe  maner  seid  afore ;  J>e  lesse  wonde$,  forsop, 
cured  I  with  vnguewto  viridi,  i.[e.]  grene  oyntment  of 
lanfrank.  Jjer  was  dede  flesch  of  bio  colowr  to  pe  brede 
of  a  peny  ;  pat  dede  flesch,  forsoj),  was  mich  pikke,  and, 
pat  y-se,  I  kutte  with  a  rasour  a  litel  pe  ouer  party  of  pat 
flesch ;  Afterward  I  putte  to  larde,  and  so  at  pe  last  with 
larde  &  with  cuttyng  I  dissolued,  i.[e.]  lesyd  it  vtterly. 
}3at  flesch  pe?-for  remoue,  eftsonej  with  pe  oyntment  of 
dyuylyn *  aforeseid  and  a  elope  wette  in  water  I  held  pe 
wounde  opne  to  pe  brede  of  a  peny,2  And  pan  eftsonej  per 
brest  out  a  wounde  aboute  pe  side},  and  it  bygan  to  large 
it  vnto  pat  it  was  almost  of  pe  same  gretnej  as  it  was  afore.3 
)5at  y-sene,  I  putted  in  four  tymej  poudre  of  litarge  and 
anoynted  it  about  with  vnguewto  albo,  and  putte  in  pe 
wounde  a  lynne  elope  wette  in  pe  water  of  herb  robert. 
Which  cure  semed  to  me  more  p?-ofitable,  and  sowded 
better  pe  extremite}  and  glowep  4  pam  vnto  perfite  halpe. 
*If  pe  mormale  be  euen  aboue  pe  schyn-bone,  pat  it  be 
more  sikerly  and  more  sone  cured  it  is  profitable  to  cutte 
pe  dede  flesch  and  putte  it  away  if  pe  pacient  consent. 
And  if  it  be  cutte,  alsone  after  pe  cuttyng  is  to  be  putte 
iu  a  cloute  wette  in  whyte  of  ane  ay  al  a  ny^t.  Afterward 
putte  in  poudre  of  white  glasse  and  of  alum  ^ucaryne, 
i.[e.]  alww  glasse,  or  alum  plume  or  of  bope.  And  if 
pou  se  pe  bone  mortified,  witte  pou  pat  it  is  incurable 
or  vnnep  for  to  merowe  be  cured.  If  pou  trow  it  be 
curable,  it  is  to  be  helped  with  some  cure  of  pe  mormale 
in  pe  boke  of  lamfrank.  Also,  as  it  is  seid  aboue,  som 
tyrne  a  man  is  smytyn  som  party  of  pe  legge  violently 
wit/<out  wondyng  of  pe  skynne,  as  of  ane  hors  fote  or  of 
a  stone  or  staffe  or  sich  oper,  and  pan  is  it  gode  sone  for 
to  scarifie  pe  place  y-smyten  and  drawe  pe  blode  penne$, 
and  after  put  on  enplastre^  repressyng  akyng  and  boln- 
yng.  ffor  oft-tymej  pe  mormale  comep  of  sich  pings. 
Agayne  pe  mormale  be  per  lesnyng*  of  vena  basilica, 
i.[e.]  lyuer  vayne,  of  pe  rijt  arme  or  on  pe  left ;  after- 
l  cum  un- 
guento  de 12  Dynelyn. 
'*  usque  ad 
festum  Scti 
Matthaei 
Apostoli  et Ecclesias 
proxime ig  sequere operatus 
sum. 
3  circa  fes- 
tum Scti 
Laurentii. 
*  et  conglu- 
20  tinavit. 
24 
28 
32 
36 
a  "  minnuschyng  "  overlined. 


A  Treatise  on  Hcemoivhoids.  55 
ward,  if  it  be  nede,  of  pe  sophene.     At  pe  last   be  he 
scarified*  in  J)e  leggej. 
I  A  I tretys  of  J>e  emoraide^y-drawen  out  after  lam-     [leaf  15T] 
4  frank,  a  discrete  maistre  of  pe  kyng$  of  fraunce  ;  which  made  oVpaes86 
tuo  bokej  of  cirurgie,  be  lesse  and  pe  more.     Also  after 
maister  bernard  de  gordon  in  his  lilie.     Also  after  maister 
bartelmow  in  his  passionarie.     Also  after  maister  Richard  Chiefly  a .  .  compilation. 
8  in  his  Micrologie.  And  after  maister  Eoland,  and  mayster 
Guy;  And  after  Roger  Bawn  And  maister  lamarcii, 
And  maister  Gilbertyne  ;  And  after  oper  experte  men 
whos  doctryne  I  haue  beholden  &  sene,  and  which  I  haue 
12  founden  moste  experte  in  practicing,  with  helpe  of  our 
lord.  I  schal  schew  pam  in  pis  boke.  Emoroys  on  Etymology 
greke  is  said  flux  of  blode,  and  it  is  seid  of  emak,  fat  is  Emeroids. 
blode,  and  rois,  flux.  Greke},  forsop,  callep  emeroys  use  the  word 
16  flux  of  blode  in  what-ener  parti  of  pe  body  it  be;  Bot  general"5 
1  Apud  anence  latyne  men  l  pis  worde  is  appropriate  to  pe  flux  of  the8Latinn 
blode  of  J>e  lure  ;  And  pe  veynes  apperyng  in  )>e  lure  when  M 
2  quando  pai  flwe,2  i.[e.]  ren,  and  ar  bolned  and  ake)>,  pai  ar  called 
20  emeroydej,  bot  neperle}  vnproperly,  sauand  pe  pece  of  be 
comon  puple.  ffor  when  bai  send  out  no  blode,  bot  ar 
bolned,  and  akep,  and  ychep  or  smertej)  pai  ar  called 
by  ober  names  anence  lechej.  Lewed  men  and  vnex-  The  un- J  _  learned  call 
24  perte   men  callej)   al   J>e   infirniitej   bredyng  in   fe    lure  everything 
emeroydej,  or  pilej,  or  fics.    ffrench  men  calle)?  emeroydej   Frenchmen 
fics,  men  of  London  callej)  J>am   pilej.     Neferlesse  it  is   "figs," 
noct  to   strife  agaynej  fe  vse  of  spekyng,  bot  raper  it 
28  spede])  |>at  lered  men  and  experte  knawe  Jje  maner  of 
spekyng  and  vse  it.  ffor  John  Damascen  seij>  '  It  is 
hexiy  for  to  chaunge  noying  custom,  and  most  if  it  be 
olde.'  Neberlej  of  be  name  is  no  stryuyng  whiles  be  but  there -r-\.  t    nothing 32  sekenej    bene   knowen.     Dmerse   auctowrej,  forsof,  hap  much  in  a 
,       ,         name  if  all putte  diuerse  names  to  be  sekenej  of  t>e  lure,  and   also  are  agreed •i  -jj-  j          •  AJU-    as  to  the 
pai   haue  assigned   dme?-se  causes   and   spicej,  And  pai  condition. 
haue  ymagined  many  maners  of  curacions  ;     Of  whiche 
36  some  more  profitable  and  ofter  experte  bene  sewyngly  to 
be  noted  vnder  compendiowsnej  to  be  vtilite  b  of  helyng. 
)3erfor   for  to   trete   schortly  it  is  first  to  witte   pat  be 
»  '  '  garsed  "  overlined.  b  "i.[e.J  profite"  overlined. 


56 Piles,  Condylomata,   Warts — Causes  and  Symptoms. 
Varieties  of 
piles : 
"  the  deaf 
piles  "  of Avicenna. 
Condylo- mata, why so  called. 
The  cause  of 
condylo- mata ; 
their  appear- ance. 
Verruca, 
their  causes; 
the  symp- toms of  the 
inflamed 
variety  : 
of  the 
chronic 
form. 
Piles  due  to 
congestion. 
emeroide3  if  fai   sende  out  blode  fai  ar   seid   ry}tfully 
emeroyde}.     If  \er  appere,  forsof,  in  fe  lure   bolnyngs 
bio  or  blak,  or  redne}  to  f  e  quawtite  of  a  bene  or  gretter, 
fat  is  to  f  e  quawtite  of  a  testicle  of  a  cok  or  of  a  hounde,  4 
as  I  haue  oftyme  sene,  som  tyme  occupiyng  f  e  to  half  of 
J>e  lure  only,  and  som   tyme  bofe,  sich  bene  called  of 
Avicen   deef   emeroyde},  for  f  er   rynnef  noting  out   of 
Jam.      And    sich    bolnyngs   forsof,    if   fei    be    gretter,  8 
puttyng  out  no  blode,  fai  ar  called  condilomata,  of  con- 
dilo  of  greke,  fat  is  fe  closed  fist  of  a  man.     Condilo- 
mata,   forsof,   schewef   pe    schappe   of    a   fist   y-closed, 
And  condilomata  bredef  of  gret  malicious  or  malencoli-  12 
ous  blode.     After  lamfrank,  forsof,  fe  lesse  bolnyng}  if 
f ei  be  blak  or  bio  fai  ar  called  attritos,1  or  atreos,  for  fe 
blak  colowr  of  fam.     If  fai  be  rede  fai   ar  called  uve, 
i.[e.]  grape^,  and  fai  haue  fe  schap  of  a  rede  vyne  or  16 
grape.     And  fai  fat  bene  of  blode  and  of  colre  ar  called 
morale},2  and  fai  ar  like  to  mulberie}  when  fai  bigynne 
to  wex  rede.     And  som  bene  called  verucale}  3  for  fai  ar 
like  to  warte},  and  sich  haf  fair  bygynnyng  of  malen-  20 
colye.     And  som  bene  of  blode,  fof  it  be  bot  seldom, 
which  ar  called  fics,  4  If  fai  be  made  of  ventosite 4  with 
grete   strechyng  of  fe  skynne.     Al  fe   forseid   may  be 
reduced  vnto   tuo  fings  :  Oufe?1  of  hotene}  of  humowrs,  24 
or  of  mych  aboundyng  of  blode.     If  fat  hotene}  be  in 
cause,  fat  is  blode  and  colre,  fise  schal  be  fe  signe — 
brennyng  witA  greuozts  prikkyng,  and  smertyng,  and  vn- 
slepyng,  and  som  tyme  wt'tA  ychyng  in  fe  lende}  and  28 vfilh   tenasmon  and   gret  costyuene}  of   fe  wombe,  and 
frist,  and  feblene}  of  goyng.     Signe}  of  cold  cause,  fat 
is  of  gret   blode  and  malencoliows,   bene  fise — bolnyng 
vfiih  hardne}  and  derkne}  and  akyng — bot  not  scharp  as  32 
of  hote   cause — fe   colour   of  fe   bolnyng   bio  or   blak, 
smertyng  in   fe  lure,   wztA  lousene}  of  fe   wombe  and 
akyng,   and  greuowsne}  or   heuyne}  of   fe  fie}.     Signe} 
if  fe  em[er]oide}  be  of  multitude  of  blode  bene  fise,  fat  36 
is  to  sey  of  fe  veyne}  apperyng   in  fe  legge}.     And  it' 
1  "  blakej  "  overlined.         2  "mulberiej"  overlined. 3  ' '  warty  "  overlined. 
4— 4  "after  gordon,  and  bai  ar  as  war  white  bledders  "  overlined. 


Piles,  their  Pathology  and   Uses. 
57 
J  et  medi- 
cinas  vena- 
rum  aperiti- vas  suimmt. 
3  Sympto- inata. 
pai  ren,  pat  pai  ren  mych  &  oft-tyme,  and  pat  pe 
pacient  be  of  sanguyne  habitude,  ffor  why  ;  in  pam  is 
multitude  of  blocle  *  fat  vsep  not  fleebotomye,  and  pat 
4  drynkep  copiously  and  oftymej  wyne,  and  fat  etep 
scharp  pings,  as  onyons,  lekej,  caule^,  corny ne,  and  pat 
takep  medicynes  apertyue^  of  veyne^,1  as  bene  scamonye 
i.[e.]  aloe  and  euforbiu???,  as  wittenessep  all  auctowrs 
8  togidre  and  experte  men.  Emeroide3  ar  caused  of  malen- 
coliows  blode,  which  is  pe  fece  of  clene  blode  aboundand 
in  our  body;  which  blode,  forsop,  for  his  yuel  quality 
and  odiow«  to  nature,  discretyue  vertu  enforcep  for  to  cast 
12  out  to  pe  helpyng  of  al  pe  body,  helpyng  pe  vertu  ex- 
pulsyue  of  al  pe  membrej  togidre.  And  so  purj  pe 
strengpe  of  nature  it  is  putte  out  fro  pe  vayne  kilyuz,2 
pat  liep  to  rig-bone  of  pe  bak,  which  properly  is  recep- 
16  tacle  of  malencoliows  blode.  Which  kylis,  forsop,  is 
diuided  into  fiue  brauchej  pat  bene  ended  about  pe 
party  of  nature a;  which  veyne$,  forsop,  when  pai  ar 
sorn  tyme  filled  of  melaucolioMS  blode  pai  distende,  i.[e.] 
20  strechep,  so  pe  veyne^  pat  ouper  pe  blode  brestep  out  or  per 
ar  gendred  bolnyng^  of  diuerse  spice^  and  schapej.  And 
also  oper  sinthomata,3  i.[e.]  pe?'ile^,  as  scharp  akyng  and 
prikkyng,  brynnyng,  ychyng,  smertyng,  thenasmon,  i.[e.] 
24  inordinate  appetite  of  egestion,  wit/i  ful  mich  enforsyng 
and  nepe?'lesse  he  may  do  none  egestion  whan  he  coniep 
to  pe  pryue.  If,  forsop,  pe  blode  brist  out  it  is  called 
pe  emoroyde} ;  but  if  pat  it  flowe  temperatly  it  dop 
28  many  helpyngs  and  preseruep  pe  body  fro  many  sekene^ 
adnste  and  corrupte,  as  is  Mania,  malewcolia,  pleuresis, 
lepre,  morfe,  ydropisy,  mormale,  quartane,  passions  of  pe 
splene,  and  so  of  oper  like.  Bot  as  it  p?-eseruep  fro 
32  pise  when  pat  it  flewep  temperitely,  so  when  it  is 
wont  for  to  flewe  and  afte?-ward  cesep  vtterly  al  pe  for- 
seid  sekenes  ar  gendred.  Also  when  pai  flewe  ouer 
temperance  pai  bene  cause  of  ptisyk  or  of  ydropisy. 
36  Wherfor  seip  Galiene  and  ypocras  after  lamfrank    '  Ich 
long  lastyng  and  ouermych  puttyng  out  of  blode  is  moste 
mi^ty   cause  for  to  make  ydropisy.'     Jjerfor  in    pam   in 
whome  malencolio»s  blode  is  multiplied  temperite  fluying 
a  "  i.[e.]  lure  "  overlined. 
[*  leaf  157, 
back] 
Those  who are  subject 
to  conges- tive piles. 
The  cause  of 
piles. 
The  path- ology of 
piles. Anatomy  of 
the  vena 
cava. 
Symptoms of  piles. 
Uses  of  piles when  they 
only  bleed moderately. 


58 The  varieties  of  Bleeding  Piles. 
What  con- stitutes 
moderate 
bleeding. 
H»\v  to  stop 
the  bleeding 
from  piles. 
The  cause  of 
the  bleeding 
in  piles. 
[*  leaf  158] 
The  impa- tience of  the 
present  gen- eration. 
Bleeding 
piles  are often  con- 
cealed piles. 
of  blode  of  fe   emeroyde^  helpef  mych,   ne  it   is  no$t 
vtterly  to  be  restreyned.     It  is  called  temperite  vse  when 
f  e  pacientes  felef  f  amself  more  li$t  fat  jjai  war  wont l ;       *  cum  pati- 
hauyng  better   appetite,   and   etyng   and   slepyng   more  4    sentiunt 
swetely  or  softely,  and  sich  o]>er.    Bot  when  Jje  pacientes       soiito  et 
felen    famself   more    heuy,    and  fer  schewe   malice   of       c'oiorati. appetite  and  foule  colowr  of  body,  fan  is  fe  flwyng  ouer 
mych;  wherfor  it  is  alsone  successyuely  to  be  restreyned  8 
and    turned    away.      Jperfor    sife    ]>er   is    nojt    a    litel 
hardnej    in  restreynyng  of   fe   emeroidej,   ferfor   many 
f  ings  ar  be  noted  of  J>e  restreyning  of  fain ;  fat  is  to 
sey    fat    fe  leclie  wytte    whefer   fe  flowyng   be   done  12 
of  anathemasy  or  of  diabrosi  or  of  rixi;  fat  is  whefer 
fe    flowyng    be    made    of    opnyng    of    veynej,   fat    is 
called   anaf emasis ;  or   of  fretyng  of   f e   veyne^,  fat  is 
called   diabrosis;   or   of    cleuyng   or  twynnyng,    fat    is  16 
called   rixis.     f  erf  or   if   fe   blode   ybro^t  to  fe   lure   be 
aduste — for  when  blode  is  aduste  it  is  scharped2 — or  if       2quiaciim sanguis 
false  flewme  or  colre  be  medled,  fan  oft-tymej  f  e  veynej       aduftu"r 
ar  freted  and  fai  make  fe  fluxe.     And  for  certayne  sich  20 
flux  is  of  hard  restreynyng.    ffor  why  ;  fe  substance  of 
f  e  veyne  yf  reted  may  no^t  be  *  sonded  3  wttA-out  disese 
and  heuynes,  sife  fat    it   nedef  a  medicyne  corrosyue. 
And  men  now-of-daiej  bene  vupacient  and  yuel  tholyng,  24 
And  for-fi  flowyng  of  diabrosi a  is  of  hard  curying.     And 
f  e  secundary  is  rixis  b  which  also  is  cured  with  corrosyue^ 
in   fe   bygynnyng.     Anathemasis c   is   more  Ii3tly  cured 
fan    fe  ofer,  bot  perauenture  nojt   without  corrosyue}.  28 
jjis  I  sey,  if  fe  flowyng  be  olde,  Anathemasis  is  made 
for   aboundance    of   blode   or   for   ventosite   descendyng 
doune.     Eixis,  forsof,  is  made  of  ouer  myche  dryne$,  of 
cause  witAin-forf e  or  of  cause  wi't/tout-forfe,  or  of  hardnej  32 
of  filfe^or  forane  hote  aposteme,  or  any  scharpe  flowyng. 
Also  flowyng  emoroydej  somtyme  ar  hidde  within,  w?t/iout 
any   bolnyngs   schewyng   outward,    fat    of    som   fai   ar 
denied  to  be  dissenterikej  and  yueh  wrong.5    ffor  why,  in  36  5  <iu*a .  quibusdam fe  inward  emoroide?  first  gof  out  egcstion  and  afterward       judicantur ,   ,  .     ,          .,,  ..  -j  T         -T  •  dysenteric* 
gof  out  blode  with  egestion  to-gidre.     In  ciliaca  passion,        et  male. 
forsof,  gof  out   blode   and   efterward  egestion.     Ciliaca 
a  "fretyng"  overlined.  b  " clyffyng "  overlined, 
c  "  opnyng  "  werlined. 
3  non  con- 
solidari. 
4  ex  duritie 
fsecum. 


Signs  of  danger  in  Bleeding  Piles.  59 
passion  is  akyiig  of  be  wombe  vtith  puttyng  out  of  blode  'J"h«y  »«? sewyng.     Also  afte?"  gordon,  scilicet  de  morbo,  '  In  euerv 
I 
,  , 
•  from  dysen- bing  bat  gob  out  of  be    body    bene    3    comon    cause?  ;  teryand '      passio  iliaca. 
i  aut  ratione    4  Ouber  by   reson   of    be  membre.  or    of    vertue.1  or   of membri  aut 
virtutis.  humour.     If  it  be  bi  reson  of  be  membre.  bat  is  for  be  Bernard  de 
.  .      ,  Gordon's 
membre  is  oue?'  bmne.     If   it  be  for  vertue,  ban  it    is   Liiium 
for  vertue  retentyue  is  feble,  and  vertu  expulsyue  strong,   quoted. 
8  If  it  be  for  humowr,  bat  is  for  ouber  it  is  malencoliows 
or  for  it  is  scharp,  or  subtile,  or  watrye.     Also  emoroidej 
ar   caused   of  scharpnes   of  blode  and  oue?'  mych   hete 
brennyng   be  blode,  as  in  colorik  men  bat  bene  of  hote  Piles  are  due 
12  nature;  for  blode  when  it  is  brent  it  geteb  scharpnes,  as  of  blood, 
it  is  seid  afore.     Also  oue?'  mych  flowyng  of  blode  is 
made    oube?-   for   multitude   of    blode,  as    in    bam    bat 
drynkeb   mvch    wyne    or    ober    metej    or    drynkei   bat  to  eating 
1ft          u-    v   u    li    j  •  and  drinking 
AO  multipliep   blode,    or   in   bam    bat    bene    sangyne   com-  too  much, 
plexion.     Also  it  is  made  for  yuel  qualite  of  blode,  as  for 
it  is  oue?'  scharp  or  subtile  or  watry,  as  in  bam  bat  vseb   0°  yj^f^ 
rawe  fruyte^,  ffor  raw  fruyte}  gendrej)  watry  blode.     }je 
20  causes,  forsob,  y-knowen,  propre  cure  may  be  done  to. 
Signe$  of  dedly  flowyng  bene  bise,  bat  is  to  sey  :  — 
fflowyng  of  blode  bryngyng  to  swouwyng  is  mortale  a  ; 
Also  flowyng  of  blode  witA  coldne^  of  extremitej  is  mor-  Danger 
24  tale  ;    Also    flowyng    bat    comeb    sodeynly     and     with  bleeding 
hastinej  is  mortale  ;  Also  flowyng  of  blode  bat  bryngeb  sudden 
to  pale  colow?',  or  grene,  or  bio,  or  browne  is  werst  and 
mortale  ;  Also  quantite  of  blode  passing  4  pouwde  is  yuel,   £allor- 
28  and  if  it  come  to  24  it  is  deb.  fflowyng  of  blode  w/t/t 
lijtnyng  of  be  body  is  gode.  In  bam  bat  boleb 
emoroidej  be  vryne  schal  be  in  cokmr  remissed  white 
with  powdry  resolucions  blak  or  bio  residentej  in  be 
32  bothme  of  be  vessel.     After  Egidi  de  vrinis,  white  and  Quotes 
remisse  ow  for  to  be  of  malencoliows  blode  oue?'  aboundant  corbeii  de 
in  be  body,  wherfor   naturel  hete  is  febled.    ffor  why  ; 
digestion  waxeb  raw,  and  of  rawnes  of    digestion  is  be 
36  vryne  discolored,  *  And  it  appereb  \vikh  poudry  resolucions   r»  ieaf  iss, 
which  bene  resolued  of  malencoliows  blode  blak  and  erbi 
abouredyng,  and  by  contynuel  waiej  bai  ar  drawen  to  be 
bladdar  and  putte  out  wit/t    be  vryne.     And  for  bai  ar 
40  heuy  and  erbi  bai  satle  in  be  grounde.     }3e  same  vryne 
a  '  '  dedly  "  overlined. 


60 The  Treatment  of  Bleeding  Piles. 
How  noli- me-iangere 
and  lupus 
are  pro- duced. 
The  blood  is 
not  confined. 
Choler  and 
melancholy are  cribbed 
in  the  gall bladder  and 
in  the 
spleen. 
The  signs  of 
melancholy. 
Treatment 
of  bleeding 
piles  by 
herb  pills. 
Phlebotomy is  best  in 
the  overfed 
and  idle 
whose  piles bleed. 
also  may   betokne   in  men  vicea  of  pe  splene,   and   in 
wymmen   witAholdyng   of  menstruej.     And    witte    pou 
pat  after  gordon  in  '  clarificaci'one  de  vicio  splenis  '  }>at innatural  humozirs  may  be  gendred  in  oper  place  fan  in  4 
pe  lyuer,  as  in  pe  stoniak  colre  peassyue,1  i.[e.]  grene,  and 
also  colre  eruginows,  of  which  is  gendred  '  noli-me-tangere,' 
and  lupus.    And  also  in  pe  veyue^  ar  gendred  vnnaturale 
humowrs.     Bot   pe   splene    hap    no   vertu   of   gendryng  8 
any  ping,  sipe  it  is  noping  hot  a  receptakle  of  malencolie, 
which  is  ane  odious  humowr  to  nature  and  to  al  membris 
of  pe  body  for  his  yuel  qualitej.     Also  witte  pou  pat 
pe  blode  hape  nouper  house,b  ne  receptakle,  ne   prison;  12 
but  colre  and  malencoly  hap  prisons,  pat  is  to  sey  colre 
in  pe  chiste  of  pe  gall  and  malencoly  in  pe  splene.     Also 
witte  pou  pat  if  pe  pacient  of  emoroidej  be  of  malen- 
coliows    complexion,    pise    bene     tokne$  :  —  smalnej  c    of  16 
body,  discolorwed,  erpi,  angry,  waike  of  hert,  heuy,  and 
only  ferpful  and   couaitows.     And  witte   pou  pat  if   pe 
forseid    pacient   sende   out   blode   blak   and  pikke   and 
stynkyng,  pat  pis  flowyng  is  no3t  to  be  restreyned,  hot  if  20 
it  ouerflowe  &  pe  pacient  be  febled.     In  euery-ping,  for- 
sop,  pe   vertu   of    pe   body  is  to  be  kept   bifor  al  oper 
pings.     Agaynj  pe  flowyng   of   pe   emoroidej  distempre 
pou  moste  subtile  mele  of  whete,  -with  iuyse  of  millefoile,  24 
and  make  perof  piling,  and  giffe  hym  euery  day  in  pe 
mornyng   3   or   4   of    pam   distempered   vrith    wyne   of 
decoccion  of  millefoile,  or  plantayn,  or  burso  pastoris,  or 
rede  netle,  or  paruencw.     Bot  if  pe  pacient  be  of  san-  28 
guyne  complexion,  and  lifyng  delicately  and  in  ydelnej, 
and  blode  be   aboundand,  pan  pof  per  be  sych  flowyng 
it  is  no^t  to  be  restreyned  hot  if  it   ouer  flow,  pat  is 
knowen  by  pe  toknej  aforeseid.     J)erfor  if  per  faH  ouer  32 
mych  flowyng,  it  is  spedeful  pat  it  be  restreyned;  for, 
after  galien,  blode  is  norischyng  of  al  me?nbrej,  als  Avele 
of  sadde  as  of  softe,  and  al  hap  bigywnyng  or  spryngyng 
of  blode  ;  and  fcr-als-mych  it  is  seid  pe  frende  of  nature,  36 
pe?'for  if  pe  frende  be  destroyed  pe  enemy  waxep  mi^ty. 
Jjerfor,    after   gordon,   to    pe    curyng   of    pe    emoroidej 
is   fleobotomy    competent,    if   vertu    and   age   sutf're   it, 
a  "  sekeiies  "  overlined.  b  "  duellyng  "  overlined. 
c  "or  Iene3  "  overlined. 
prasina. 


The  Treatment  of  Piles  ~by  Phlebotomy.  61 
bobe   for   it  avoidej)    matery    goyng  afore,  and    also   it 
wit/idraweb  be  matery  to  be  contrary.*   'And  fleobotomy   uioodtobe 
ow  to  be  done  of  be  basilic  veyne  of  be  arme  for  mater  *«>»»  the •  '  basilic  vein 
4  goyng  afore,  and  afterward  of  be  sophenis  at  be  hele,  be  or  the ~.  *  external 
vtter    sophe    turneb    be   flowyng   of   be    emoroide}   and  saphenous. 
restreyneb   be   emoroyde}    for   euermore.      Whiche   fleo- 
botomy, forsob,  continued  *fro  }ere  to  }ere,  and  namely    I*  fcanw] 
8  about  be  fest  of  seynt  Micheli,  bifore  and  after  one}  or 
twie},   or   when-someuer    be    pacient    felej?    tyklyng   or  The  Weeding 
ychyng  or  prykkyng  in  be  lure,  ban  be  he  minusched  as  annually6 it  is  afore  seid,  and  alsoue  he  schal  be  cured.     Also  witte   Michaelmas. 
12  bou  bat  fleobotomye  of  be  inward  sophenis  of  be  leggej 
prouokeb  be  emoroide}  and  menstrue} ;  And  of  be  vtter  Bleeding 
sophenis  streyneb  be  emoroidej  and  menstruej,  and  we-  internal '     .  saphenous 
serueb  for   certayne  fro   be   forseid  passions.     Sophenej   lia<1  for  Piles 
i     c  i  and  men°r- 16  bene  bo  grete  veyne^  bat  ar  strecned  fro  be  kneej  vnto  rhagia. 
be  ankle^  of   bobe  partiej  of    be  legge}.     )3e   maner  of 
doyng  of   bis  fleobotoraye  is   bat  it   be   done   about   be  ^^my 
hour  of  euensong   or   latter,   bat   is   in   be   regnyng   of  saphenous 
20  malencoliows  blode,  bat    is   fro    be    9    hour  of   be   daie 
vnto  be  3  hour  of   be   ni?t.     Also  witte    bou  bat   fleo-  Evening  is '  '          '  the  proper 
botomye  to  be  done  vnder  b  be  hele  and  in  saluatella  of  time  for 1  phlebotomy. 
be  handej,  oweb  no^t  to  be  done  w»t»  a  blode  iren  bot 
24  with   a   lancete,  for  hurtyng  of   be  synewe^,  but  if  fat 
nede  make  it.     Also  witte  bou  bat  he  bat  schal  be  laten  Treatment 
blode  oweb  for  to  putte  his  fete  in  hote  watre,  and  eft-  phlebotomy, 
sone  bam  owe  to  be  putte  agayn,  bat  be  blode  go  out 
28  bette?- ;  And  be  pacient  ow  to  abide  still  in  be  watre, 
vnto  bat  be  blode  fat  appered  first  blak  dhaunge  into 
fairer  colow.  Be  bis  doct?-me  boldly  kept,  for  if  it  be 
no^t  done  competently  it  profiteth  nobing  or  litel ;  ffor 
32  certayne  I  haue  cured  for  euermore,  wiih  on  latyng  blode 
al-only  of  be  vtter  sophene,  many  men  bat  boled  be 
emoroidej  many  jeres,  vnto  be  feblyng  of  be  body. 
Bot  witte  bou  bat,  after  gordon,  bat  bof-al  fleo- 
36  botomye  make  blode  fluxible,  neberlesse  if   it   be   done 
of  be  vtter  sophene}  it  draweb  be  flowyng  to  be  opposite ; 
1  et  ita  facit.       and   so   it   makyng x  be  flowyng  for   to    be   turned   fro 
be  lure  bat  it  flow  nojt  to  be   costomable   place ;    and 
40  forbi   it   profiteb   to    al   bat   ar   cured  of   be   emoroide}, 
a  "  opposite  "  overlined.  b  "  at "  overlined. 


62  Treatment  of  Piles  ly  Purgatives. 
and   also    to   al   pat   ar   disposed   to   pe   emoroide},   for 
The  patients   to  be  laten  blode  of  pe  outward  sophenis,  one?  or  tuyei 
should  be  *  v~* 
let  blood        m  ver  and  alse  otte  m  autu??ipne  fro  }ere  to  }ere.    fror 
twice  every    why ;    sich   fleobotomye   for   certayne   preseruep   fro   pe  4 
autumn  even  emoroide},  and  avoidep  paciente}   fro  al  yuel   humowrs 
piiesgbe  '* *  and  kepep  pam  in  hele.     And  per  be  no  blode-later  redy, 
be  per  made  ventosyng  with  garsyng  atuix  pe  buttoke}  at 
pe  rigebone  ende  or  aboue  pe  veynej,  for  it  dope  pe  same  8 
pat  pe  forseid  fleobotomye,  bot  nojt  so  expertly,  bot  nede 
The  patient    ^Q^Q  no  lawe.     1  And  it  is  to  witte  pat  if  pe  leche  may       i  Ad  quod must  be  faciendum 
purged          gette  pe  ri}t  reule  by  al  pings  in  euery  wirchmg  after       myrobaiani 
bled.  crafte,  fleobotomye  ow}t  neuer  to  be  done  in  pe  emoroide}  12  tumcon- 
byfore  purgacion  y-done,  and  pan  sewyngly  mynischyng.       quia  myro- 
Also  after  gordon,  in  ouer  mych  flowyng  of  pe  emoroide}, 
and  also  of  menstruej,  is  competent  a  medicyne  laxatyue 
to  purge  corrupte  humours  pat  inducep  pe  flowyng,  pat  16  comprfmen- 
pe  cause  cesyng,  pe  etfecte  cese.     To  which  ping  to  be  done       eos^mnores 
fotoebbest8    al  pe  mir[obalan)]   a  [con]ouenie/*t  ffor  mira-       "nt^Myr"- 
fn^^nes^6       bolan)  laxep  afore  pam  and  streynep  after  pam    .     .     .     .  a       j^m'  hoc 
and  pai  avoide  al  yuel  humowrs.     Jjerfor  be  pai  preparate  20  ™£^J>^_ 
.a        decocte  byfor  pat  pai  be  taken,  for  bi       Non  debent •  myrobaiani 
decoccion  pair   a       decoqui antequam 
back]  *and  so  pe  strength  of  laxatiueyng  shuld  be  febled,  bot       fumantur, 
bai  ow  to  be  resolued  in  rennyug  liquore,  as  in  mylk  or  24  decoctionem J  eorum  gum- 
raisins  and     whey,  vfiih  racyns  &  liquorice,  ellea  walld  pai  schrenk  b        niitas  in liquorice  '  *  fumum  re- 
may  be  used,    j,e  stomake  and  lefe  yuel  tokenea  byhyndc  pam:  and  so        soiveretur ,      -          ,.  ,    ,  .  ,  et  sic  vis 
of  be  racyns  and  of  pe  liquore  ar  pai  reuled  pat  pai  bryng       purgandi  de- 
r*n--\    t        u  i      j          /^     i  •        ii       OC  bilitaretur. in  no  harme.      Which,  forsop,  resolued  and  pe  kirnelle^  -^o 
cast  away,  lat  pam  lie  al  a  ni^t  in  pe  same  liquor,  and  in 
pe  mornyng  pe  colyng  be  giffen  to  drynk.     jjis  medicyne, 
forsope,  of  mirobolan)  is  ful  noble,  sipe  it  purgep  humo^^rs 
of  nijt  placej,  pat  is  citrine}  colre,2  kebuli}  fleume,3  Indi  32  gj,"*^^.1 
malencoly,  i.fe.l    blak   colre,  bellerici  and   emblici  colre       3  kebuii 
flavam. aduste.     And  so  may  al  pe  humowrs  be  purged ;  wherfor 
be  mirabolan)  hadde  in  reuerence,  ffor  pai  availe  mich  to 
pe  emoroide}  and  menstrue}  to  be  purged.     And  pis  medi-  36 
cyne  for  certayn  curep  euery  flux  of  pe  wombe,  pat  is  to 
scy  diaria,  dissenteria,  liencaria.     Also  it  is  to  wytte  pat 
•  A  portion  of  the  leaf  is  missing.         b  "ronkle  "  overlined. c  ' '  after  "  overlined. 


Treatment  of  Piles  ly  Diet  and  Medicines.  63 
in  pacientj  of  be  emoroide^  be  ]>er  neuer  giffen  medicyne} 
apertyues  of  veyuei  noube?'  be  ]>e  moube,  as  scamone,  or  but  never J  \         scammony 
aloe,  or  euforbium,  comyn,  lekej,  onyans,  garleke  and  sicb.  or  aloes. 
4  ober  scharp  bing} ;  ne  be  bar  nojt  putte  opon  be  place,  out 
take  aloen  and  comyn,  which  tuo,  putte  outward,  streyneb, 
and  witft-in-forb  taken  opne]>  veyne}.     Bot  it  is  to  wytte 
bat  in  be  forseid  fluxes  of  be  wombe  mirabolan)  ow  to  be   Jh,e  myro- balans  may 
8  dissolued  in  gote  mylk,1  if  it  may  be  had,  or  in  iuse  or  bejdvenin goat  s  milk. water  of  fumitere  or  of  playntane,  or  in  rayne  water  or 
rose  water,  or  of  veruene,  or  of  anober  stiptike  herbe  as 
millefoile  or  mynte.     Also  witte  bou,  after  al  auctowrs, 
12  bat  pose  pings  bat  restryneb  emoroide}  restreyneb  men- 
struej,  and  econverso  :  And  be  same  sekenej  bat  comeb  of  what  is  good 
.  ,  ,  .  -TO  f°r  Piles  is 
be  vice  of  menstruej,  comeb  also  of  be  emoroid,  &  econverso  :  equally  good 
.  ,    for  menor- and  so  by  sewyng  a  bat  ]>ai  acorde  in  cure,    perfor  in  cold  rhagia. 
16  cause  be  J>ai  giffentpat  hetep  and  ingrossep  J>e  mater  of 
flowyng  of  blode,  als  wele  of  be  party  of  mete}  as  of 
medicyne}.     Of  J>e  party,  forsob,  of  mete^  be  ber  giffen 
milk,  mele  of  whete  decocte,  frese  bene^,  with  canel,  gret 
triticaf  faba*  ^  wyne>  r^3e  2  an(i  ^y^te.     Of  be  party  of  medicyne  be  ber  Remedies  to 
fera  cum  giffen  note  of  cipresse  3  and  be  lefej,  mirre,  thure.  mastike.   the  treat- cinnamomo,  '    ment  of 
vinum  Iadanu7?i,    storax   calamita,  anyse   rosted,  and   sich   obe.  piles. crassum, 
rube.  And  excercice  and  strong  frotyngs  and  swetyngs  availejj. 
pressl CU      24  And  if  pe  cause  be  hote,  be  ber  giffen  lentesb  vrith  vinegre, 
4  Portuiaca         porcelane,4  sour  milk,  soben  barly  brede,  substance  of  colej 
6  cauiisdua-       j?e  tuo  watrej 5  bat  it  is  decocte  in  y-cast  away,  perej, 
abjectis.  coyncej  6  &  melde^,7  &  sich  obe?'.     Medicyne}  restrictyue} 
e  Mespiia.     28  bene  bise ;  Camphore,  accacia,  spodin,  coriandre,  sangwe's 7  Cotonea.  ,  .  .  ' 
»  hEemat.            draconts,  sandali,  lap[isj  omoptoes,8  bole  armoniac,  ypo- 
9  Hypo-  quistid,9  galley  cupule,  sumak,  mirtett,10   quistidos.  .          ,  ,   .,  . 
.     .     .     .c     plantane,  cincloile,  qumquineruie,  nbbewort, 
32  bursa  pastoris,  millefoil,   c     forsob 
a  "  it  fohve)) "  overlined.  b  "  growel  "  overlined. 0  A  portion  of  the  leaf  is  missing. 
0  The  Latin  text  of  this  mutilated  passage  runs  :— pysidiae, balaustia,  plantago,  quinqueneruia,  sanguinaria,  millefolia  et 
similia.  Corpora  ergo  patieutis  haemorrhoides  sine  menstrua  super- 
flua  existente  pletharico  i.[e.J  pleno  sanguine  ex  virtute  forti  prse 
ceteris  attendendum  est  ut  in  initio  phlebotomia  fiat  de  utraque 
basilica  brachii.  Deinde  mulieri  menstruosae  ponantur  ventosae 
magnas  sub  utraque  mammilla.  Deinde  mundificetur  secundum 
exigentiam  humorum  peccantium.  Deinde  liga  brachium  ligatura 
dolorosa.  Deinde  fiant  localia  remedia.  Et  id  quod  intelligendum est,  &c. 


64 Treatment  of  Piles  by  Local  Applications. 
[leaf  160] 
Local  appli- cations for 
piles. 
Styptics  for 
piles. 
Concealed 
piles  lead  to ulceration  of 
the  rectum. 
Delicate 
men  are 
usually 
timid. 
of  pe  pacient}  emoroidej  or  menstrue^  beyng  plettorike  .   . 
.     .     .     .c     beyng  strong.     "Which,  is  to  be  take  hede  to 
afor  al  o]>er  J>ings   ° 
fteobotomy  of  basilica  of  bope  pe  armes.  4 
And  it  is  to  vnderstond  pat  pis  is  wont  to  availe  aboue 
al   oper    ping} :    'Recipe     luyse    of    plantane,    muscilage 
dragaiwte  &  guwme  arabic ;  be  pai  medled  to-gidre,  and 
o  party  be  take  be  pe  moupe  and  anoper  be  cast  in  by  a  8 
clistery ;  and  be  pis  continued,  and  without  dout  it  schal 
cure  perfitely,   vniuersale  purgacions   goyng  afore,  after 
barnard   gordon.     Also  corall  brent  and  gu?nme  arabic, 
y-medled  and  y-dronke  with  cold  watre,  streynep  pe  flux  12 
of  blode,  of  what  place  so-euer  it  flowep.     Also   caneH 
hape  pis  prop-trie,1  pat  if  per  be  take  of  it  to  pe  wejt  of  2 
penys  eueryday  with  cold  water,  it  streynep  at  pe  best  pe 
flux   of   emoroides  &  of  menstrue}.     And  if  pe  forseid  16 
poudre  be  giffen  with  watre  of  plantane  it  schal  be  more 
effectual.     Also  vitriol,  i-[e.]  coprose,  streynep  pe  flux2 
of  enieroirfes  and  driep  humowrs,  if  it  be  made  with  luyse 
of  moleyn,  or  of  plantayne,  or  verueyn,  or  rubarbe,  i.[e.]  20 
sengrene ;  ffor  why ;  of  pe  medlyng  of  pe  iuyse  of  any 
of  pe  forseid  cold  herbes  pe  hete  of  pe  vitriol  is  repressed ; 
wherfor  it  constreynep  with  drinej.    Bot  it  is  to  wytte  pat 
pe  emoroide}  hid  with-ln  pe  lure  3  ful  seldome  bene  made  24 
without   fretyng   of   longaon   or   kynnynga   of   it,    And 
perfor  certaynly  sich  maner  emoroydej  may  no$t  perfitely 
be  cured  bot  with  a  medicyne  eauteri^atiue,  as  is  vitriol 
combuste  be  it  self  or  medled  with  quick-lyme,  in  a  grete  28 
case,  pat  is  in  a  grete  fretyng.     Also  puluis  sine  pari  in 
pis  case  putte  in  helep  wele,  bot  disesily  or  angerfully ;  bot 
pat  is  nojt  to  charge.4    ffor  to  a  strong  sekenej  answerep  a 
strong  medicyne,  and  namely  in  strong  men.    I  calle,  forsop,  32 
delicate  men  feble  men.   ffor  al  pingj  bene  hard  to  a  waik 
hert  man.     To  a  strong  hert  man,  forsop,  is  noping  grete. 
To  emoroide^  hid  wt't/iin  pe  lure,  wheper  pai  be  with  fret- yng or  clyffyng  or  wMout,  pe  most  noble  cure  schal  be  36 
ich  day  to  caste  in  in  mane?-  of  clistre,  or  ich  oper  day,  al 
0  See  note  on  page  63.  a  "  cleuyng"  overlined. 
i  Item  cin 
namomutn liabet  bane 
proprieta- 
tem, 
2. cum  succ 
tapsibarbat 
3  sine 
corrosione 
longanonis 
&  ejusdem fissura. 
4  sed  de  hoc 
non  est 
notandum. 


The  Treatment  of  Piles  by  Local  Applications.  65 
medicynej  temperatly  liquide  in  swbstance  with  a  schort 
and  no  maner  streit  nastar  of  tre.  To  strong  men  perfor 
tak  pulut'u  sine  pari,  and  medle  it  with  a  litel  tapsimel,  A  strong ....  .  local  remedy 
4  nouper  to  pinne  ne  to  pikke,  bot  pat  it  may  most  com-  for  piles, 
petently  be  pristed  out  and  jetted  into  pe  lure.     If  forsop 
pou  haue  nojt  tapsimel,  in-stede  of   it  tak  hony  cotted 
with  a  litel  vinegre  and  scorned,  and  medle  it  wit/t  pe 
8  forsaid  pulm's,  and  vse  it,  for  it  euenly  availep  as  tapsimel. 
If  pe  pacient,  forsop,  be  delicate,  pan  tak  of  citrine  oitment  A  milder 
parte  1,  vitriol  combust,  partes  ij,  alom  jucarine  als  mich 
as  of  bope,  and  be  pai  medled  to-gidre  and  jetted  in :  pis, 
12  forsop,  wirkep  nojt  so  violently  as  puluis  sine  pari  for  pe 
vertgrej  pat  entrep  not  here,  ffor-sop  when  pou  has 
done  pus  onej,  or  tuyse,  or  prise,  after  as  it  fallep  pe 
pacient  for  to  withhold  pe  medicyne  long  or  schort  tyrne, 
16  It  bihouep  pan  for  to  chaunge  pe  cure  and  giffe  clisterej   Examine 
mitigatiuej,  of  jolk  of  an  ey,  with  oile  of  rose£,  and  pulm's  as  soon  as 
of  bole  armoniac,  and  aloes  epatici,  or  sang  dragon,  by  3   p 
daies  or  more.     When  pe  pacient,  forsop,  felep  hymself 
20  aleged,  pan  assaye  bisily  wheper  pe  inner  place  nede  ony 
maner  of  pe  first  medicyne,  i.[e.]  of  pe  pulm's  with  tapsi- 
mel, pat  if  it  so  be,  be  it  eft-sonej  done,  as  it  is  seid  afore, 
als  oft  as  it  is  nede ;  Af terwarde  be  it  mitigate,  as  it  is  cleanse  it 
24  seid.      When  pe  place,  forsop,  is  mundified,  pan  be  it  ointment 
heled  with  pe  jolk  of  an  ey  &  water  of  xoset,  in  which  be  healed. ' 
resolued   gurarne  arabic,   addid  per-to  pulm's  bole,   sano: 
oiibani.  dragon,  ceruse,  aloes,  gait,  psidie,  mumme,  olivai  *  mastike  ; 
28  *  and  pe  lure  first  enoynted  within  with  lynsede  oile  &  oile  [*  leaf  100, 
of  roset,  pe  forseid  medicyne  be  jetted  in.  with  a  nastare 
and  so  continue  it  vnto  pe  last  ende,  or  on  like  maner 
after  pin  owne  witte   &   bisines.      And  witte  pou  pat 
32  when  per  is  putte  vitriol,  or  puluis  sine  pari,  or  any 
pulurs  corrosiue  within  pe  lure  aboue  fretyngj  or  cliffyngj, 
pan  aboue  pe  pulm's  corrosiue  owe  bole  armoniac  to  be putte,  for  to  defende  be  puluis  corrosiue  bat  pe  humidite  vitriol  is better  than 
36  m  pe  lure  quench  nojt  &  wescn  away  pe  pulms  corrosiue.   bole  ar- 
ffor  why;  bole  with  his  drynes  and  viscosite  consumip 
pe  moistenej,  and  vitriol  wirkep  better  and  more  strongly. 
If,  forsop,  pou  haue  no  bole,  pan  putte  most  smal  meel 
40  of  barly  in  his  stede,  for  it  is  rijt  mich  desiccatiue.     Jjise ARDERNE.  P 


66 The  Treatment  of  Piles  by  Corrosives. 
Nettle  juice 
is  a  good remedy  to 
stop  bleed- ing. 
The  hairs  of a  hare  and  a 
powder  of 
burnt  hen's feathers  are 
both  good to  stop 
bleeding. 
Tinder,  too, 
is  good. 
Acupressure 
stops  bleed- ing, and  so does  the 
cautery. 
The  applica- tion of  cold 
is  a  styptic. 
Clay  with vinegar  may be  uned, 
f  ings  restreyuef  blode  :  ventosing  putte  with  scarification,* 
putte  ex  antipasi,b  and  mirre,  and  lasper  of  grene  colour 
hauyng  in  itself  naturale  droppes  of  blode,  Saphir  rede 
eoralle  rubye,c  l  and  fyme  of  wilde  swyne.     Also    f  ise  4 
restreynef  blode,  of  f  e  vertu  of  fair  qualite}  :  luyse  of 
walwort,  luyse  of  rede  netelt  broken d  with  al  his  sub- 
stance, salt  y-put  f  erto.     Or  luyse  of  nettel  y-dronkyn 
restreynef  blode  in  euery  place  of  f  e  body  and  of  euery  8 
cause,  e  and  in  bof  e  kynde.e     Bot  it  is  to  wytte  fat  to  a 
woman  in  menstrue}  and  to  fam  fat  hauef  fe  emoroidej 
owe  f  e  rote  of  it  to  be  giff  en  with  f  e  croppe}  of  f  e  same  2 
3  daies  continuly,  \vith  rayne  watre  or  rennyng  watre.  12 
Also  of  fam  fat  restreynef  blode  bene  f  ise  :  Mumme,  bole 
armoniac,  sang  dracon,  thure,  aloe,  vitriol  combust,  puluer 
of  heres  of  ane  hare,  brent  or  no}t  brent ;  pulm's  of  he/me} 
fefers  brent,  medled  with  white  of  ane  ey  ;  Alphita,  i.[e.]  16 
subtile  &  clene  meel  of  barly  3 ;  Also  a  been  clouen  by  f  e 
midde}   and   putte   vpon   a  wonde   and   bounden   faste, 
streynef.4    Bot  f  is  haf  e  no  stede  bot  to  so  streyt  a  wounde 
fat  f  e  been  may  take  within  his  extremite}  f  e  extremite}  20 
of  f  e  wounde,  as  of  prikkyng  of  a  smal  knyfe  or  sich  a 
f  ing.    Also  aschen  of  ane  olde  lynne  clof  e  y-brent  streynef 
blode  ;  f  e  white  of  an  ey  and  barly  mele  y-putte  aboue  or 
witAouten.    Som-tyme  it  bihouef  for  to  bynde  f  e  heuede} f  24 
of  f  e  veyiie  with  ane  nedel  putte  vnder  f  e  veyne,  and  afte?1 
for  to  bynde  with  a  f  rede  aboue  f  e  nedel.     Som-tyme  it 
byhouef  for  to  cauterize  fe  wounde  with  an  hote  iron. 
Also  blode  is  stopped  with  coldyng  of  fe  membre  y-hurte,  28 
wherfor  oft-tyme}  is  blode  restreyned  in  som  men  with 
one}  drynkyng  of  colde  watre.     And  som  men  puttef  fair 
testicule}  in  cold  watre ;  And  som  men  lappef  fair  testicule} 
in  clay  with  vinegre  or  watre,  or  temperate  with  iuyse  of  32 
plantayne ;  And  f  is  is  profitable  to  fam  fat  bledef  at  f  e 
nose.     And  it  is  better  if  fe  fronte  and  temple}  of  fe 
pacient  be  emplastred  of  f  e  forseid  clay,  and  also  if  it  be 
putte  vnder  fe  armehole}  ;  fis,  forsof,  quenchef  fe  feruowr  36 
of  blode  and  drawef  to  f  e  opposite.    Also  puluere}  y-putte 
a  "garsing"  overlined.          b  "  on  \>e  contrary  "  overlined. 
c  "  rubye  "  has  been  crossed  out.  d  "  brissed  "  overlined. 
e— e  "i.[e.]  of  man  &  woman"  overlined.     f  "  endej "  overlined. 
1  corallus 
rubri,  et 
stercus  porci 
campestris. 
2  radix 
imnmitat 
ejus( 
3  Item  faba 
per  medium 
*  sanguinem 
stringit. 


Various  Styptics. 67 
1  Pulvis  ex 
pilis  leporis combustis. 
2  Item  facit 
porrns  et succns  ejus, item  folia 
tapsi-bar- bati. 
3  Item  sue- 
cus  ebulse. 
<  cum  sum- mitatibus 
tapsi-bar- bati. 
<*  antheae. 
6  et  cribran- tur. 
in  pe  nose  may  more  strongly  streyne  &  availe.  *  Puluer 
of  here}  of  ane  hare  y-brent1  aboue  alpings  streyne])  pe  flux 
of  pe  emoroide},  y-medled  with  white  of  an  ey  and  -with 
4  here}  of  ane  hare  no}t  y-brent ;  coton  of  softe  stupe} 
y-putte  aboue.  And  som  men  with  pe  forseid  puluer 
alon  and  pe  white  of  an  ey  anoyntej)  pe  emeroide}  with- 
out puttyng  to  of  coton,  and  alsone  cese}>  pe  flux  and 
8  }>e  akyng.  Witte  pou  pat  aloe  and  comyn,  recepte  bi 
]>e  moupe,  opne])  veyne} ;  and  putte  to  wz'tA-out-forp 
restreynep.2  |3e  same  dop  leke}  and  pe  iuyse  of  pam  pe 
lefe}  of  moleyne  y-brissed  and  put 'to  with  pe  white  of 12  an  ey  streyne})  pe  emoroides  and  helep  pam  sone.  Also 
Iuyse  of  orpyne 3  y-dronken  with  wyne  helep  al  fics, 
without  and  -within ;  wherfor  it  is  called  fics-herbe. 
Also  lana  succida  y-dipped  in  pe  iuyse  of  porre},a  pe 
16  lefe}  remoued  away,  and  hote  putte  to  bolned  emor- 
oides, and  when  it  is  collde  eftsone}  renewed,  and  oft 
tyme}  so  y-done,  it  is  a  certayne  remedy  agayns  pe 
bolnyng  of  emoroides ;  And  if  pulm's  of  comyn  be  pntte 
20  perto,  it  schal  spede  better.  To  emoroide}  y-bolned  and 
apperand  as  war  a  chykyn  torde,  brisse  wele  blak  sope 
with  pe  tendrons  of  moleyne4  and  putte  vpon;  and  pe 
prid  day  pai  schal  no}t  appere.  Oile  of  violette  with 
24  white  of  3  eiren  well  stired  to-gidre  and  putte  to,  on  a 
wonderful  mane?-  mitigatep  pe  akyng  and  brynnyng  of 
pe  emoroide}.  Agayn}  ouer  mych  flux  of  emoroides  and 
of  menstrue}  pe  best  medicyne  cowstrictiue  and  desiccatyue 
28  is  made  on  pis  maner.  In  pe  best  luwbarde}  ynk  be 
dissolued  a  gode  quantite  of  guwimc  arabic;  which  dis- 
solued  putte  in  of  pulm's  of  bole  armoniac,  mastic, mumme,  sumak,  rede  coralle,  bdellii,  galle},  psidie,  acacie, 
32  anteros  5  ypoquistidos  subtily  puluered  and  sarced,6  ana  ; 
and  medle  pam  to-gidre  so  pat  pai  may  be  }ette  into  pe 
lure  by  a  nastare.  With  pis  medicyne  was  cured  Deme- 
trms,  kyng  of  Perse},  of  a  cnsten  man  pat  was  halden 
36  prisoner  with  pe   same   kyng ;   which   cristew   man  was 
made  ful  riche,  and  was  sent  home  to  cristew  me/me}  lande 
by  pe  comandement  of  pe  same  kyng,  and  many  prisoners 
of  cristen  men  war  late  go  free  with  hym.     Panis  cuculi 
a  "  leke}  "  overlined. 
[*  leaf  161] 
but  after  all the  burnt hairs  of  a 
hare  are  the best  for stopping 
bleeding  in' 
piles. Aloes  and 
cummin 
taken  in- 
ternally 
cause  bleed- 
ing from 
piles,  ex- 
ternally they 
stop  it. 
Remedies 
for  piles. Leeks. 
Powdered cummin. 
Black  soap 
and  mullein. 
Gum  arabic dissolved  in 
ink 
cured  Deme- trius, king 
of  Persia,  by 
the  hands  of a  Christian. 


68  Treatment  of  Piles  by  Medicine. 
alleluya,  i.[e.]  wodsour,  is  a  treyfole  growyng  vnder 
Cuckoo  busche}  and  berep  white  flowre},  is  a  ful  sour  herbe.  Ane 
wrapped  in  handful  of  pis  herbe  without  any  brissyng  be  lapped  in  a 
leaves  may  lyn  clouth  y-wette  in  water  and  pristed  out,  or  in  lefe}  of  4 
be  tried  in         J  \  >     •> piles,  con-      rede  dok,  and  be  it  rested  vnder  hote  aschen  pat  it  be dylomata 
and  dead       no}t  dryed ;  afterward  be  it  draw  out  and  brissed,  and  put 
it  vpon  emoroide},  or  fics,  or  condilomata,  or  dede  flesch, 
wher-so-euer  it  is  It  fretep  softly  &  remouep  al  pe  forseid  8 
ping},  aboue  any  ping  of  pe  world :  perfor  when  it  may 
esily  be  had  it  noyep  noit  for  to  assay.     A  Eial  ping l       l  experi- J  J    '  mentura 
expert,  pat  wonderfully  and  happily  amendep  pe  errowr       regale, 
als  wele  of  pe  first  digestion  as  of  pe  seconde,  and  dop  12 
I«  leaf  lei,     away  wicked  colowr  &  vnnatwral,  *and  it  restorep  natural 
A  stomachic  colowr  and  makep  it  gode  :  Recipe  cynamom,  ynyh  galang1, 
who'ha^e       reubarb  ana ;  be  pai  subtily  puluered,  to  which  be  done 
plles'  }uccary  2  euenly,  and  brese  pam  to-gidre.     Vse  pe  pacient  16  2(A^brls 
pis  puluer  in  bygynnyng  of  his  mete  to  pe  we}t  of  5       sacchari. 
drams  in  wyne  ;   pis  medicine  is  profitable  to  pam  pat 
hape  pe  emoroides,  for  pai  ar  oftyme  discolored.     And  it 
is  to  witte  pat  if  it  may  be  done  on  gode  inaner  per  owep  20 
neuer  to  be  putte  to  in  pe  place  remedie}  mitigatiue}  bot 
pe  bodi  war  first  muwdified  with  farmacie,  i.[e.]  medicyne 
laxatiue,  as  is  of  pe  forseid  mirabolan)  and  fleobotomye, 
A  soothing     for  ellej    be   mitigatiue}   availep   lest.     A  mitigatiue  of  24 application 
for  inflamed  akyng  to  emoroide}  bolned,  \vith  prikkyng  and  bryn- 
nyng : — Make  ane  emplastre  of  comon  malue  lefe}  decocte 
in  watre  and  after  well  y-brised,  w?'t/i  swyne  grese,  oile  of rose  putte  to,  or  of  violete,  or  of  lilie,  or  of  camamille,  or  28 
of  comon  oile  if  pe  toper  be  nojt  had.  It  schal  be  made 
pus  :  pe  lefej  of  malues  decocte  and  pe  watre  expressed,  be 
pai  wele  fried  in  a  pan  vrith  some  of  pe  forseid  oile3  ;  after- 
ward streche  pam  on  wolle  y-tesed  or  subtile  stupe}  of  32 
line,  and  putte  pam  to  hote ;  and  wonderfully  it  myti- 
Liiy  roots  gatep  pe  akyng.  If  pe  rote  of  lilie  may  be  had  and  be 
added  to  it.  sopen  wz't/i  pe  forseid  malue}  it  schal  be  more  effectuoMS. Jjis  emplastre  is  comone  yno},  ffor  in  wynter  may  lilye  36 
rote}  be  hadde  when  malue}  failep,  and  pan  may  pou  do 
witTt  pe  rote  al-on  as  it  is  seid  of  pe  malue} ;  if  pai  hope 
may  be  had  pe  emplastre  is  more  effectuows.     Also  pe 
akyng  and  bolnyng  of  emoroides  is  mitigate  wit/<  pe  }olk  40 


Arderne  s  own  Ointment  for  Piles.  69 
of  ane  hard  ey  rested,  and  oile  of  rose  and  crocus  done 
to ;  -which,  y-brissed  to-gidre  and  wi'tTi  wolle  putte  to,  it 
mitigatep  wonderfully  in  euery  cause.  And  it  schal  be 
4  better  if  per  be  added  to  opium  in  litel  p?-oporcion.  Also 
ane  emplastre  of  be  white  of  ane  rawe  ey  and  oile  of  Jhy*icipe, »  forArderne  H 
violette  bette  to-gidre  and  putte  to  is  seid  wonderfully  for  ^toint' 
to  be  mitigatiue.     Also  be  eiren  sopen  hard,  and  J>e  white 
8  of  pam  \vith  oile  of  rose  or  of  violet}  or  of  bobe  vrith 
coton  be  putte  to  hote,  it  cesep  pe  akyng  of  be  emoroide} 
in  one  ni}t,  and  dot  it  away.     J?is  is  pe  medycine  which 
I,  lohn  Arderne,  made,  pe  which  I  wold  neuer  wante,  for 
1 2  it  mitigatep  wonderfully  euery  bolnyng  of  emoroides,  and 
akyng  and  prikkyng  with  brynnyng,  and  it  dop  it  away  : 
which  owe  to  be  made  pus : — Recipe  Moleyn  and  swyne} 
1  succum  grese x  wele  y-clensed  of  pe  litel  skynne}  and  smal  y-kutted ; 
etaxungia     16  and  be  pai  wele  brissed  togidre  in  a  morter  or  in  a  basyn porci  a 
peiiicniis  vnto  pe  grece  be  wele  imbibed  of  pe  iuyse :  and  pan  lat mandate.  . 
pis  grese  vrith  pe  luse  stand  stille  9  daie}  or  more  vnto  pe 
2  quo  viso          grese  shew  grene  :  which  y-se,2  eftsone  sone}  be  it  brissed iterum  cum  °  J 
svicco  eadem  20  \\ith  pe  same  iuyse,  And  when  pe  grese  is  perfitely  imbibed 
tundatur.       ,    and  colored  of  pe  iuyse,  putte  away  pat  pat  is  superflue  of 
pe  iuyse,  and  eftsone}  brisse  pe  grese  without  any  iuyse   Arderne 
and  putte  it  in  an  erpen  vessel,  and  kepe  it  to  pin  vse ;  ointment 
24  And  }?is  medicyne  is  called  tapsiualencia.     And  witte  pou  Valencia." 
pat  pis  medicyne  owe  fro  monep  to  monep  one}  to  be  j^11^ brissed,  and  in  pe  brissing  for  to  putte  in  litel  hi  litel  of   stirred  once 
oile  of  rose,  or  violet,  or  camamille,  pat  pe  valence  may   a  month- 
28  competently  imbibe  it.     And  if  per  war  added  to  of  gode 
3  et  si  de  popilion3  pe  helpyng  of  pe  medicyne  schal  be  more  effectual, 
leonadditur.       Jjerfor  when  pou  hast  nede  for  to  vse  perof,  tak  lanam 
succidara,  if  *pou  may  haue  it,  and  if  pou  may  no}t,  tak    [» leaf  162] 
32  oper  clene  tesed  wolle  and  putte  per-on  of  tapsivalencia  The  oint- .,,,.,  .  nient  may 
with  pi  fynger  or  w*tn  a  spature  imp?-essyng  it,  and  be  per  i>e  spread  or i  ,  IP,  applied  with 
made  ane  emplastre  more  or  lesse  after  pe  discrecion  of  pe  the  finger  or 
leche,  and  putte  it  on  pe  lure.    Bot  witte  pou  pat  afore  pe 
36  puttyng  to  pat  pe  lure  be  wele  fomented  vrith  a  sponge 
y-wette  in  hot  watre  of  decoction  of  malue}  and  branne,  and 
be  it  hote  putte  to  and  abide  long  peron.  ffor  win  ;  sich  fo- 
mentacion  availep  mich  more  for  certayne  pan  hote  stuphis, 
40  and  more  hidep  pe  rede  bolnyngs  and  lessenep  pam,  as  I 


7*0  Fomentations  for  Inflamed  Piles. 
haue  of-tymej  proued.  After  pe  fomentacion  and  desiccacion 
of  pe  lure,   be  pe  bolnyngs  anoynted  with  oile  of  rose 
chaufed  in  ane  ostre  scheH;  and  putle  in  wele  -with  pi  fynger 
pe  oile  atuix  ]>e  runcle}  of  pe  skynne  ;  And  af  terward  putte  4 
and  it  should   to  pe  forseid  eiuplastre  menely  chaufed,  And  be  it  bounden, 
place  with  a    pat  it  falle  no^t  away,  with  lynne  cloiite^    and  a  girdel 
atuix  pe  bottokke^,  as  it  is  seid  in  pe  fistule}.     And  with- 
in one  ni^t  pe  akyng  schal  be  cesed.     )3is  inedicyne,  for-  8 
The  remedy    sop,  passep  all  oper  to  pe  akyng,  bolnyng,  brynnyng,  prik- 
for  piles,        kyng,  and  smertyng  in  pe  lure,  of  which  blode  rennep 
no^t;  And  he  pat   hape  pis  medicyne,  hym  nedep  none 
better.     Bot  neperles  it  is  gode  for  to  kune  many  Inter  x  12  l  Sed  tamen '  bonum  est 
imttheieech should  know 
of  others.        pat  one  aeiailyng  he  may  go  agayne  to  anoper.     And  it  is        plena  scire 
to  wytte  bat  in  akyng  and  bolnyng  of  pe  emoroide},  pat 
noube?-  stuphej  of  hote  stones,  and  thure  &  coluer  fyme  2  and       2  et  fimo .      *  columbine. 
sicn  oper,  ne  syttyng  aboue  vessele^  WUA  herbe^,  as  many  16 
Foments-       fole?  dop,3  be  nojt  so  competent   as  fomentacion.     ffor       3  sicutmuiu tions  for  in-  stolidi 
flamed  piles,    certayn,  fomentacion  made   wttt  watre  of  decoccion  of       faciunt. 
comon  maluej  or  furfur  colace,4  hide])  wele  and  mitigate])       4  vei  furfu- 
and  dissoluef  Jje  emoroides   about  })e  lure.     Also   witte  20 
J>ou   pat   in  akyng  of  pe  emoroides  per  owe  to  be  putte 
Hippocrates   nobing  cold  in  acte  bot  hote.    ffor  after  ypocras  cold  pingj quoted. 
in   acte   bene  enemys  to  bone},  to  synowe},  to  tepe,  to 
brayne,  to  be  lure,  to  pe  bladdre,  and  to  pe  nerw^  of  pe  24 
rigebone.5    And  forpi  pe  medicyne  when  it  is  applied  vpon       5  vesi«ss,  ac 
pe  wolle,6  it  ow  a  litel  to  be  holden  agaynj  pe  fire,  pat  pe        medulla. 
actuale  coldnes  be  done  away,  and  paw  put  it  to.     When       unam" 
a  lech  sep  any  man  hauyng  grete  ake  and  many  bolnyngs  28 
or  fewe,  more  or  lesse,  aboute  pe  lure  wa'tfrouten,  with  ful 
mych  akyng  and  payne,  pan  it  is  spedeful  pat  afte?-  pe 
puttyng  to  of  ane  emplastre  mitigatiue,  and  fomentacion 
inBamcd        done  tuise  or  brise  —  If  be  forseid  bolnyngs  begynne  nojt  32 piles  should 
be  lanced       to  abate  —  bat  pe  leche  with  a  lancet  or  a  blode  iren  smyte freely 
warly  pe  bolnyng^  ful  of  blode,  pe  pacient  no3t  wittyng, 
and  receyue  he  pe  blode  in  a  sponge  wette  in  hot  watre 
and  expressed  and  putte  to  pe  bolnyng.  And  do  pe  lech  36 
pis  boldely,  for  per  is  no  perile  per-in.  ffor  why  ;  I  haue 
proued  pis  ful  oft  tymej  for  to  be  most  soiie  helpyng.  Jje 
fleobotomy  y-done,  be  per  putte  vpon  of  valence  or  some 
oper  equiualent  medicyne,  and  be  per  done  fomentacions  40 


Treatment  of  Thrombosed  Piles.    Tencsmus.  71 
and  enoyntyngs  vnto  f  e  bolnyng}  and  fe  akyng}  vtterly 
defaile.     If  f  e  leche,  forsof,  may  no^t  wirk  fus,  make  he  and.  th« 
be  pacient  for  to  be  fleobotomed  of  f  e  vtter  veyne}  of  f  e  *f*<£.wa.d8 
4  leggej  in  the  euyng  as  it  is  seid  afore.  Also  if  fe  leche 
se  any  men  haue  aboute  f  e  lure  without  rounde  bolnyng}, 
in  f  e  endej  a  of  which  apperef  blak  spotte^,  witte  he  fan 
for  certayn  fat  in  f  am  is  blak  cluttered  b  blode ;  which 
8  forsob  yknowen,  be  ber  done  *fomentacions  and  enoynt-  [*  ieafi82, 
back] 
yng}.    And  afte?-ward  tarye  nojt  f  e  leche  for  to  opne  with  a 
launcet  be  •  forseid  bolnyngj  in  f  e  place  of  be  blaknes —  Throm- J    '  bosed 
f  e   pacieut   no^t   wittyng — ftor  f  e  pacient  schal  fele  no   piles  should 
12  greuance  fer-of  ;  I  haue  proued  it  forsof  e  oft-tymc},  And 
with  fis  cure  al-on  I  haue  sene  ful  many  for  to  haue  be 
cured  for  euermore,  and  fat  rijt  sone.     IT  And  be  f  e  lech 
war  fat  none  of  fam  fat  standef  about  perceyue  when  he   shouicTbe 
1 6  opnef  with  f  e  lancet  or  sich  of  e?*  f  ing  sich  maner  bolnyng}.   ieest  the"6 
ffor  if  barboi«-s  knowe  fis  doyng  f ai  wold  vsurpe  fis  cure,   to  knowgor 
appropriand  it  to  famself  vnto  vnworschip  and  no^t  litel 
harme  of  maystre^.     U  If  any  man,  forsof,  haue  as  it  war 
i  pendentes  20  purse^ l  aboute  f  e  lure  wt't^oute,  hyngyng  in  mane?-  of  a 
marcidse.  welked  gri[pe],  which  ar  wont  for  to  bifalle  of  inflacion  and 
ouer  miche  extension  of  ernoroides  had  afore ;  fan  if  f  e 
pacient  consent  fe  lech  may  without  perile  kutte  away 
24  with  a  lancet  or  a  rasowr  al  fo  burse3,  first  y-bond  with  &. 
f  rede,  and  afterward  sone  hele  fam  with  vnguento  arabico. 
tyme  a  sekenej  bat  is  called  tenasmon,  berfor 
16.      A    nd  for  bat  fai  bat  haj>e  be  emoroides  habe  oft-   Tenesmus  ; J.A. 
28  here  we  make   mencion  ber-of.     Tenasmon  is  a  sekenej   definition. 
\vithiu  j?e  lure  bat  makef  be  pacient  for  to.  desire  purgyng 
of  his   womb  byneb-forb  ;  ffor  it  semeb  hym  euermore 
bat  he  mi^t   haue  egestion,  and  when  he  comef  to  fe 
32  pn'ue  he  may  no^t  haue  egestion.     H  Cause  of  bis  seknes  Causes  are •  i       i  •  i        .  -,  •  -i  .1          piles,  ulcer- bene  som  tyme  emoroides  hid  WitAin  be  lure,  or  pustule^,  ation.purga ,  /•         i  ^  i  9    tives.  or 
«  vei  rropter        or  excoriacions  in  longaon,  or  for  chynnyngs  ot  longaon  z   chronic  con- fissiiras  i-i  11     i  T  FIJI  ••LMJ-        stipation. 
longarioni.          which  ar  called  ragadie,  or  for  hote  humowr  imbibed  in 
36  longaon,  or  for  fat  cold  humowr  is  inuistate  fer,  or  for 
apostemej,  or  for  vlcere^,  or  for  takyng  of  laxatiue  rnedi- 
cyne.     Signe}  of  hote  cause  in  thenasmon  bene  hotenej, 
brennyng,  and  prikkyng.     Signej  of  coldne^  is  fat  cold  is 
1  "  heuedej  "  overlined.  b  "  coagulate  "  overlined. 


72 Treatment  of  Cutaneous  Piles — Tenesmus. 
The  signs 
and  sym]  - toins  of 
Tenesniu?. 
The 
prognosis. 
The  treat- ment of 
Tenesmus. 
[*  leaf  163] 
Clysters  of 
goat's  milk. 
i  et  simili- 
bus  calidis 
aperitivis. 
feledin  fat  place,  and  it  is  helpid  of  hotene^.  U  If  it  be 
for  apostemes,  fer  is  grete  akyng  &  greuows.  IT  And  if  it 
be  for  vlcere^,  ]>er  is  gret  akyng  when  any-fing  is  putte 
J>er-in.  And  if  it  be  for  emoroide^,  ]>er  apperef  bolnyng  4 
and  inflacion  and  akyng  in  f  e  veyne^  fat  ar  about  f  e 
circle  of  f  e  lure.  And  if  it  be  for  fece},  it  is  knowen  forfi 
fat  f  e  pacient  long  tyme  afore  went  no^t  to  sege.  U  And 
if  it  be  for  medicine  laxatiue,  it  is  knowen  for  fer  was  in  8 
it  Diagredium  or  scamonie  or  pulpa  coloqm'wtidis  or  aloe. U  And  if  it  be  for  outward  cause,  it  is  knowen  by  schewyng 
of  f  e  pacient.  U  Pronosticacion  is  f  is  :  If  fat  f  e  thenas- 
mon  last  long,  it  bringef  to  fe  colik  and  iliaca  passion,  12 
and  to  vnslepyng  and  feblenes  of  vertu,  and  malice  of 
folyng,  and  to  passions  of  fe  heued,  and  to  swownyng. 
And  cause  of  fise  is  continuel  akyng.  U  If  it  be  for  out- 
ward cause,  Sitte  fe  pacient  in  ane  hote  bath  of  swete  16 
watre  \vith  oleo  laurino  and  sicli  ofer  hote  apertyue^.1 
U  And  if  it  be  for  aposteme  and  fe  bodye  be  plettorik,  be 
fer  made  fleobotomye  of  basilica  ;  And  if  fe  apostems  be 
hote,  be  fer  made  clisterie^  of  iuyse  of  endyue,  scariole,  20 
coriandre,  oile  of  rose  and  white  of  an  ey.  After  fat  f  e 
sekene^  haf  preceded,  be  fer  added  to  fise  henne}  grese 
fresch,  and  f e  dusty  a  meel  of  f e  milne,  and  a  litel  hony. 
And  al  bise  be  giffen  leuke  in  acte.2  *And  if  f  e  24  2  et  omnia '  jsta  dentur 
aposteme   be  cold  fro  fe  bigynnyng,  be  fer  made  ane       actutepida. 
oyntment   of    f  e    iuse    of    apii    and    oile   of    rose,   and 
camamille,  and  branne,  and  iuse  of  caule^.     After  fat  fe 
sekenes   hafe  preceded,  be  fer  added  to  fenigreke  and  28 
liwnesede,   and  be  fai  ministred  euermore  hote  in  acte. 
H  Witte  fou  fat  in  thenasmon  fer  is  nofing  more  pro- 
fitable fan  ^ettyng  in  by  a  clistery  of  gote^  mylke ;  And  if 
fou  haue  no^t  gote3  mylke,  tak  cow  mylk,  and  put  fer-  °~J 
to  a  subtile  whete  meel,  and  boile  fam  togidre  in  maner 
of  children  pappe ;  adde  f  er-to  f  e  raw  ^olk  of  an  ey  in  f  e 
decoccion,  and  a  litel  fresch  schepe}  grece  after  f  e  lique- 
faccion,  and  cole  it,  and  putte  in  hote  bi  a  clisterie ;  fie,  36 
forsof,  is  mych  mitigatyue.     U  Also  f  e  ^olk  of  a  raw  ey 
tempered  with  bole  armoniac  to  sich  f ikknes  fat  it  may 
by  a  clistery  be  ^ette  into  f  e  lure,  cesef  at  f  e  best  thenas- 
a  "  flying  "  overlined. 


Treatment  of  Tenesmiis.  73 
mon ;  and  pis  haue  I  proued  oft  tyme^.  1F  If  tenasmon 
be  for  ragadias  i.[e.]  chynnyng}*  wit/iin  pe  lure,  cure  pe 
ragadias  and  thenasmon  schal  be  cured.  IT  A  remedie 
4  agayn3  thenasmon  of  what  euery  cause  it  be,  after  Bernard 
of  Gordon,  cap ito  de  thenasmon;  Hecipe  fenigrec,  semen  Bernard de 
Gordon's 
lini,     malue    bismalue,    camamille,    mellilote,    i.|e.l    pe   clyster  for Tenesraus. 
croppe3  of  caule^,  ana  ;  be  pai  bnssed  and  boiled  in  watre 
8  vnto  mene  pikkene^,  and  be  it  coled,  and  be  it  warme  cast 
in  by  a  litel  clistery.  ffor,  for  certane,  outward  fomenta- 
cions  and  suffumigaciows  profitep  no^t  so  mych  as  medi- 
cyne3  putte  in  by  a  clistery,  and  pat  haue  I  oftyme  proued. 
12  U  Agayn^  greuows  ychyng  and  vnsuffrable  in  pe  lure  take  pe   Treatment 
cheiidon.         iuyse  of  celydome,1  of  moleyne,  ana,  hony  scomyd  als  Unjf™ 
mych  as  of  ]>e  iuyse^,  and  boile  pam  togidre  to  pe  wastyng 
of  pe  iuyse3 ;  after  sette  it  downe  i'ro  }>e  fyre  and  kepe  to 
16  vse.  When  pou  wilt  vse  per-of  agayn3  ychyng,  tak  per-of 
als  mych  as  pou  wilt  and  putte  per-to  of  pulm's  of  vitriol combuste  and  alum  combuste  and  orpment,  and  if  nede  be 
boile  it  agayne  vnto  it  be  ane  vntement  haldyng  fastyno^, 
20  and  putte  a  litel  J?er-of  into  pe  lure  agayn3  J>e  ychyng,  and 
sone   it  schal  cese,  and  in  euery  pa?'ty  of  pe  body  for 
certay[n].     And  pis  oyntment  is  called  tapsimel,  of  tapsi-   bytapsimei. 
barbastib  &  mellec;   fforsofe  pis    is  a  noble  oyntment. 
24  U  Ragadias  may  we  nojt  curebotif  we  bryng  in  medicyne3   Treatment .  .  -,  ofrhagades, 
wttAin  pe  lure,  ouper  wtt/i  clistery  or  wztA  suppository  ;  which  is 
ffor  medicyne3  putte  Avt't^out-f orpe  p?-ofitep  ouper  litel  or  ukeration  of TITI       f        /-.,-,    t     -I  i    t  •     i          M.T.  the  rectum. 
no3t.     Wherfor  first  it  byhouep  for  to  wirch  wzt/t  corro- 
28  siue3  to  pe  mundifiyng,  and  afterward  vfiih  consolidatyue3 
and  desiccatiue3,  as  it  is  seid  afore  of  pe  emoroides  hid 
w/tftin  pe  lure.     II  Agayn3  ragadias,  after  maister  Eic/tarJ  A  ferric .        .       .  -r.      •          M  j       *     •  M        £  ointment  re- in micrologio  suo,  Recipe  one  made  oi  eiren,  or  one  oi  rose,   commended 
2  et  succo     32  &  white  of  ane  ey  raw,  and  iuyse  of  lyuane,2  &  cimbalarie  d   Richard  the 
ana;   medle   pam  togidre   &   put    J>am   in.       HAgayn3   Englis 
ragadias  wit/an  be  lure  be  made  sich  ane  oyntment  after  Anointment 
,        .    '        invented  by Gilberts ;  Recipe  one  of   rose  and  oi  violeues  ana  51.]    Gilbert  the ia  i  ,    i          T-  i        ,     •      i          ii  -i  Englishman. 
<jo  gote3  or  schepe3  talow  siss.  be  pai  al  molten  togidre  at 
pe  fire,  and  sette  pam  doune,  and  movie  it  continuly  \viik 
a  "  cleuyng  "  ovcrlincd. 
b  "  moleyn  "  overlined.        °  "  hony  "  overlined. 
d  "  penny worte"  ovcrlhied. 


74 Treatment  of  Promise  of  the  Rectum. 
[leaf  163, back] 
Prolapse  of 
the  rectum, 
treated  by 
bleeding and  a 
fomentation 
of  gallic  or tannic  acid. 
Put  back 
the  pro- lapsed bowel and  ke«p  it 
in  place  with a  dressing. 
The  remedy which  cured 
K.  Henry  of 
this  com- 
plaint. 
a  spature ;  and  when  it  is  almost  cold  putte  in  pulucr  of 
R.  tn'asantalorww  §ss.  and  medle  hem  togidre ;  it  hele)> 
wonderfully.  U  Also  oile  of  linsede  putte  in  availed  agayn^ 
pe  forseid  sekene} ;  it  is  forsoj)  ri^t  desiccatyue.  4 
17.     A     gayn 3  goyng  out  of  pe  lure :  If  vertu  and  age 
_X~V_     suffre  be  per  fyrst  y-done  fleobotomy  of  pe  vtter 
sophene  of  ]>e  legge;  Afterward  be  pe?-  done  suff'umigacion  or fomewtacion  of  gaH,  or  of  pe  rynde  of  a  grene  oke  or  dry  ;  8 
of  pe  rynde  of  pome-granate  pat  is  called  psidia,  and  of  pe 
flourej  of  granate  fat  ar  called  balaustia ;  of  pe  rote  of  cam- 
fery  decocte  in  rayne  watre.     And  if  it  be  in  somer  ]>ise  may 
be  added  to,  or  ellej  by  ]>am  selfe :  verueyne,  moleyne,  12 
plantane,  gawel,1  psilliu??i,  iuyse  of  coriandre,  berberi?,       i.myrr.ha 
porcelane,  bursa    pastoris,  rede  rose,    tanesey,  wormode, 
horsmynt,   and  sich  ope?-  stiptikej.     UOf  pise  of  which 
pou  may  haue  best  make  ane  hote  fomewtyng  with  rayne  16 
or  rynnyrag   watre,  vinegre   added  perto  ;    And  after  pe 
fomewtyng  be  sprenkled  aboue  pulm's  of  bole,  of  sanguis 
di&conis,   of   herte^    home   co?wbuste,  bark-duste,  psidie, 
balaustie,  mumme  and  sich  like.     H  Afterward,  if  it  may  20 
be  done  on  any  maner,  be  pe  longaon  putte  into  his  place, 
and  -be  it  fast  bondyn  with  warlyne^  2  pat  it  go  no^t  out. 
Also  agayn^  goyng   out  of  pe  lure  be  it  fomented  -with 
watre  of  decoction  of  caule^,  and  after  anoynt  it  Vfith  aloe  24 
and  vnguentzm  vetws  broken  togidre.     U  Also  agaynj  pe 
goyng  out  of  pe  iure,chaufe  or  make  hote  apostolicon;  which 
chaufed,  be  longaon  touched  with  it,  and  alsone  it  schal  entre 
agayn.     IT  If  it  be  nede  do  it  oftymej  when  it  gop  out ;  28 
Afterward  be  it  bathed  in  watre  of  plantane,  of  porrej,  of 
peritory,  or  of  peritorye  3  alon.     With  pis  medicyne  was 
kyng  henry  of  yngloud  cured  of  pe  goyng  out  of  pe  lure. 
2  ligetnr 
cum  cautela. 
3  sed  soli  us 
parieturise 
[leaf  164]     is.  T)  [A  treatise  on  clysters.]  32 
JL3e  a  leche  wele  pz^ruied  pat  he  haue  a  couenable  4 
instrument  for  clistryej  to  be  ministred ;  pat  is  pat  he  haue  a 
pipe  of  tree,  namely  of  box,  or  of  hesel  pat  availep  mych, 
or  of  salowe,  to  pe  length  of  6  ynche^  or  7  with  on  hole  36 
alon ;  ffor  old  men  vsed  pipes  holed  in  pe  side.     Bot  witte 
pou  for  certayne  pat,  as  I  haue  lered  be  experience,  a  pipe 
with    one   hole  availep   more,  and   jettep   better   in   pe 
Arderne's improve- ment on  the 
ordinary 
clyster  pipe ; 


Arderne's  Enema  Apparatus.  75 
liquore.  H  Afterward  haue  he  a  swynej  bledder,  or  a 
netej  bledder,  no^t  blowne  to  myche,  which  pou  schalt 
preparate  pus  for  to  be  kept.  Take  pe  forseid  swynej  or  his  appara- 
4  netej  bladder  when  it  is  dry,  and  putte  perin  a  sponeful  of  ^genemkVa. 
comon   salt,  of  water  als  mych,  of  hony  als  mych  as  of 
watre ;  latte  Jam  be  dissolued  togidre  in  pe  bledder  by 
tuo  daies  naturale,  And  euery  day  tuyes  or  pries  be  pe 
8  bledder  twrned  or  shaken  about,  pat  it  may  be  wette  of 
pe  liquore  on  euery  side.  Afterward  be  pat  putte  out 
tat  is  pe?'-in,  and  be  J>e  bledder  blowne,  and  be  be  His  method /  of  preparing 
mouth  bonden  pat  pe  wynde  go  no^t  out,  and  hyng  it  in   the  bladder. 
1 2  ane  vmbrose l  place  vnto  pat  per  be  had  nede  per-of . 
jjis  p?-eparacion,  forsop,  kepep  pe  bledder  fro  corrupcion 
long  tyme,  And  fro  fretyng  of  wormej,  and  makep  pe 
bladder  strong  and  able  to  pe  vse  of  the  forseid  werk. 
16  U  Be  pe  clistrye  made  ber  after  my  mane?-,  for  it  is  lilt  bot  The  simpler •  the  enema 
no^t  lesse  effectuale.     Many  pings  bene  profitable  to  pe  the  better, 
confeccion  of  clisteries,  if  pe  lech  mijt  haue  a)  redy.     Bot 
oft-tyme  pe  leche  may  no^t  fynde  in  euery  place  al  ping} 
20  necessary  to  hym ;  perfor  it  schal  no$t  vnworschip  2  a  lech 
for  to  spede  profitably  vrith  fewer  pings  and  lijter.  Old 
lechej,  forsop,  ordeyned  costiuows3  clystryej,  greuows  and 
lijt,  and  pai  putte  in  cassiam  fistulam,  mirobalan),  rerepigre 
24  and  oper  laxatiue^ ;  which  clisteriej,  forsop,  after  pair 
receyuyng,  made  pe  paciente}  more  cowstipate,  i.[e.]  en- 
costyued,  pan  pai  war  before ;  And  perfor  long  tyme}  and 
oft  tymej  I  haue  proued  and  bene  experte  a  Ii3ter  mauer 
28  of  clystrying  and  more  effectuoMS,  as  wele  in  childre  and 
wymrnen  as  in  men,  als  wele  in  $ong  men  as  in  olde  men ; 
And  in  diuerse  case}  as  in  wounded  men,  constipate4  men, 
and  febrows  men,  and  in  colica  &  yliaca.  And  I  spedde 
32  effectuowsly  wit/i  sich  a  clistre  pat  is  per  made.     U  'Recipe  Prescription 
malue}  comon  and  grene  camamille,  or  drye  if  pou  may  si,rnpieery 
haue  it,  and  brisse  pam  a  litel,  and  sethe  pam  in  watre  eneina- 
vnto  pe  watre  become  grene ;  pan  tak  whete  branne  als 
36  myche  as  sufficep,  and  putte  it  to  pe  forseid  herbis  and 
boile  it  a  litel ;  afterward  cole  it,  and  to  pe  colyng  adde  to 
ane  handful  of  salt  and  clene  hony  or  oile ;  and  be  al  wele 
1  "  schadowye  "  overlined.  z  "  ne  schame  "  overlined. 
3  "  i.  of  gret  cost "  overlined.  4  "  costyue  "  overlined. 


76 Useful  Ingredients  for  Clysters. 
Salt  and 
water  are really 
enough  for an  enema. 
[Ieafl64, back] 
Honey 
useful  in 
clysters. 
Herbs  to  be 
used  in 
clysters, 
and  salt  in 
moderation. 
Clysters 
require  skill. 
Ardcrne's methods 
better  than 
those  of  the 
Lombards  in 
London. 
resolued,  mouyng  it  vfith  a  spature  or  w/t/t  pi  hande ;  pis 
confection,  forsop,  may  be  kept  by  a  fourtni^t  if  it  be 
nede.  IT  If  maluej,  forsop,  or  camamille  may  nojt  be 
hadde,  vrith  water  &  branne  and  salt  wit7«out  any  olper 
ping  pe  forseid  nede  schaH  be  sped  wele  yno^  for  certayn. 
ffor  whi ;  for  certayne  if  a  lech  wanted  aH  o]>er  ping}, 
vrith  water  alon  &  salt  boiled  togidre  and  3ette  in  by  a 
clistrye  bn'ngep  out  sqwiballej. 
Bot  witte  pou  fat  pise  bene  necessary  to  pe  confeccion 
of  clistrie^,  fat  is  to  sey,  Hony,  oile,  batter,  salt,  swynej 
grese,  sope  white  and  blak,  oile  of  camamiH,  oile  of  rwe, 
&  oile  of  malue^,  sanguis  veneris,  &c.  Of  which  forseid 
white  sope  may  euer  more  be  necessary  to  a  leche,  for  it 
y-putte  in  pe  forseid  decoccione  and  ]>er  schaken  wele 
\vith  pe  hande  mych  strength  ej)  }>e  clistrye ;  and  pis  may 
euer  more  be  had  redy.  Also  hony  when  it  may  be  hadde 
dope  grete  help  in  euery  clistery.  IT  jjise  bene  herbe} 
necessary  to  )>e  werk  of  clistry,  scilicet  Violette,  malue^, 
camamiH,  mercuriah's,  watercresse,  caule  lefe^,  peritorie, &c.  Of  which  som  wirchep  mollifying,  as  malue^ ;  some 
dissoluyng,  as  camamiH,  peritorie,  and  ope/*.  Bot  wytte 
j?ou  pat  in  clistrying  pe  leche  owe  for  to  augmente  and 
lessen  J>e  p?-oporcion  of  salt  afte?-  pat  pe  vertu  of  pe  pacient 
may  thole,  i.[e.]  suffre,  for  pe  tendernes  of  longaon,  and 
after  pat  he  sepe  pe  pacient  strong,  softe  or  hard  for  to 
avoiden.  ffor  grete  quantite  of  salt  makep  sone  pe  clistery 
for  to  haste  to  pe  goyng  out,  And  mene  quantite  bryngep 
no^t  out  so  sone.  Jjerfor  be  pe  lech  waker  in  pis  pat  he 
be  no^t  negligent  ne  fole-hardy  in  his  wirchyng.  ffor  it  is 
werk  of  a  perfite  maistrye.  ffor  pe  which  I  haue  geten  ane 
hundrep  tyme^  grete  honour  with  lucre  in  diuerse  place^. 
ffor  whi ;  at  london  when  lumbardej  of-tyme3  ministred 
clisteriej  on  pair  maner  to  colic  men  and  ope/1  men  con- 
stipate,* ne  my^t  no^t  availe,  J  I,  forsop,  \viih  pe  forseid 
maner  of  clistriyng,  at  pe  first  tyme  wit/iin  pe  space  of  a 
forlong  or  of  tuo,  I  deliuered  pe  pacient  for  certayne,  our 
lord  beyng  mene.  U  When  pou  wilt  forsop  giffe  a  clistre, 
Tak  of  pe  forseid  decoccion  half  a  quart  at  pe  moste  and 
putte  it  in  pe  bladder,  and  putte  pe  gretter  ende  of  pe 
a  "  encostiued  "  orerlined. 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
32 1  Ego  cum 
predicto inodoclister- 
ijandi  primo vice  infra 
spatium OD  unius  stadii vel  duorum 
patientem, 
deo  medi- 
ante,  de- liveravi  pro 
certo. 
[Sloane  56, leaf  24.] 


\ 
On  Clysters.  77 
pipe  into  pe  bladder,  and  bynde  it  faste ;  and  anoynte  pe 
forper  end  of  pe  pipe  with  fresch  swynej  grese,  or  with 
butter,  or  with  popilion,  or  with  comon  oile,  or  with  hony. 
4  And  putte  in  pi  fynger,  anoynted  first  with  some  of  ]>e   Directions 
forseid  ]>ings,  into  pe  lure ;  And  alsone  putte  in  pe  pipe  of  ciysTer."8' pe  clistre  into  pe  lure.    And  pan  ow  pe  leche  for  to  presse 
pe  bladder  with  pe  liquore  atuix  his  honde^  and  $ette  in 
8  pe  liquore.     And  if  he  fynde  as  it  war  ane  obstacle  in  36 
wombe  lettyng  pe  entryng  of  pe  liquore,  as  it  oftymej 
fallej,  fan  draw  agayne  a  litel  pe  pipe,  and  he  schal  fele 
pe  liquore   entre,  and  pan  jette  in  al  pe  liquore ;  which 
12  y-^ette  in,  make  he  pe  pacient  for  to  lye  grouelyng  aboue 
his  bedde,  and  frote  &  robbe  his  wombe  vpon  pe  nauyl 
with  his  owne  hand  or  with  anoper  marme^ ;  *And  enforce    [*  leaf  165] 
he  hymself  als  long  as  he  may  for  to  wit/ihold  pe  clisterye,   The  use  of J  »    '    clysters  in 
16  And  when  he  may  no  longer  hold  it,  go  he  to  a  sege   diagnosis, 
made  redy  with  a  basyne  standyng  vnder-nepe  and  per  do 
his  nede^.    And  se  pe  lech  pe  egestions,  wheper  it  be  blode 
or  putride  flemme  &c,  or  wormes  or  sqwiballe^  indurate, 
20  or  wheper  colre  go  out  or  quiter  &c.     And  pus  may  pe 
leche  be  certified  what  is  to  do  in  euery  cure.     IF  Ouer 
pat  pis  is  namely  to  be  written,  pat  when  pe  lech  ministrep   Tne  use  of 
clistery  to  any  man,  pat  in  $ettyng  in  pe  liquore  with  pe   prognosis! 
24  clistery  pe  liquor  alsone  stirt  out  vpon  pe  hande^  of  pe 
leche,  so  pat  pe  pacient  may  no$t  withhold  it  ne  receyue 
it ;  and  pat  dure  2  daies  or  3,  for  certayne  sich  a  pacient 
is  disposed  to  pe  dep  without  dout,  pat  is  if  pe  liquor 
28  Betted  in  be  no3t  oue?-  scharp  of  pe  salt,  jjerfor  be  pe 
leche  circu?uspecte,1  for  ful  seldom  haue  I  sene  pis  reule 
faile  for  certayn,  hot  neperlesse  it  holdep  no^t  cue?-,  pat  is 
if  pe  sekene}  go  agayne  to  wele-fare.2  IT  Also  it  is  to 
32  witte  pat  when  pe  leche  hape  wele  clensed,  bi  pe  clistery,  pe 
wombe  of  fece$  and  ope?'  superfluite^  seid  afore,  pan  pro- 
fitep  it  mych  for  to  jette  in  a  clistery  made  of  decoccione 
of  malue^,  if  it  may  be  hadde,  and  of  branne  and  of  butter 
36  &  oile  or  swynej  grece.     If  malue},  forsop,  may  nojt  be   A  soothing 
had,  pan  be  it  made  only  of  decoccion  of  branne  and  of  clyster< 
pe  toper  seid  aboue,  and  be  it  3etted  in  by  pe  clistery. 
1  "  biholdyng  aboute  hym  "  overlined. 
2  "  or  myjtynes  "  overlincd. 


78 The  rationale  of  Clysters  and  their  action. 
The  use  of 
clysters  in colic. 
How 
clysters  act. 
[*  leaf  165, back] 
Nutrient 
enemata  re- commended. 
Clysters 
may  be  given seasonally 
and  to  pre- vent illness. 
Be  J)is  clistery  forsojje  made  wz't/iout  any  salt,  And  pan owe  pe  pacient  for  to  wit/ihold  it  strongly  by  al  a  ni}t  and 
longer.  And  pis  schaH  conforte  pe  bowelle}  and  schal  molli- 
tien  pam,  and  schal  kepe  pam  fro  constreynyng  vnto  pai  4 
be  filled  wiih  new  fece}.     Elle},  forsop,  of  pe  voidene}  of 
be  bowelle}  fie  bowelle}  schuld  be  constipate,  as  I  haue  oft 
tyme  sene.     U  It  is  to  witte  pat  in  curacione  of  pe  colic 
no  medicyne  so  sone  helpep  as  clistery ;  ffor  why  ;  pis  8 
bryngep  out  hard  sqraballe}  of  what  euery  cause  pai  be 
witftholden,    And  it  avoidep  soueranly   ventosene},   and 
wonderfully  puttep  out  viscose  tiemne  &  putrified.    Wher- 
for  I  haue  oft-tyme}  cured  many  paciente}  with  clistery  12 
without  any  oper  medicyne,  And  oft-tyme}  within  3  houre}. 
And  per  for  it  spedep  for  to  wirk  first  \viih  a  clistre  in 
colic  &  yliaca  passions ;  ffor  pe  lower  bowelle}  avoided  of 
pair  superfluite},  pe  ouer  bowelle^  may  more  li^tly  putte  16 
out  fro  pam  pair  superfluite^  to  pe  lawer  bowellej.     U  As 
auicen  seip,  al  pe  bowellej  of  a  rnawnes  wombe  ar  con- 
tinued with  venis  miseraicis,  out-take  longaon,  for  longaon 
is  no^t  continued  to  pam.     Wherfor  pe  lyuer  may  drawc  20 
to   hym  fro   ouer  bowett    somwhat,    And   by  pis   is   it 
schewed  pat  if  ane   hole  man  bi  any  case  be  distitute 
of  appetite  of  *  mete  and  drynk,  pat  he  may  no  mane?1 
ete,  pat  by  pe  infusion  into  pe  lure  by  a  clistrye  of  any  24 
norischyng  liquore,  as  of  any  potage  or  mylke  of  almande} 
or  sich  oper,  pe  lyuer  mygth  draw  perof  to  hymself  and 
so  norisch  pe  body.     U  Jjerfor  witte  pou  pat  clisterie^  no^t 
only  availep  to  seke  men  and  constipate,  as  of  pe  colic  or  28 
of  sich  oper,  bot  it  availep  to  al  men  beyng  in  pe  febre}, 
als  wele  acue^  as  crenic,  i.[e.]  long  tyme  lastyng,  And  to 
eue?*y  inflacion  of  pe  wombe,  and  to  ventosite  of  it,  and 
torcions,  i.[e.]  gryndyng.     And  som-tyme  it  availep  mych  32 
in  som  fluxe^  of  pe  wombe ;  And  for  certayn  it  availep 
mich  to  hole  men,  constipate  and  no^t  constipate,  if  pai 
be  purged  twyse  at  lest  or  3  or  four  tyme}  in  a  jere  witft  pe 
forseid  clisterie}  ;  pat  is  tuyse  in  wynter,  and  in  vere  as  it  36 
war  after  lentyn  one},  in  somer  one},  or  ofter  tyme  if  nede 
be.     U  ffor  why ;  pe  benefiteof  it  may  no  man  nouwbre  ; 
ffor  as  it  helpep  fair  in  necessite,  so  it  p?-eseruep  pam  pat  vsep 
it  fro  harme  &  necessite  :  be  it  perfor  had  in  reuerence.      40 


Of  Atramentum  or   Vitriol.  79 
atramente^,  i.[e.J  of  vitriole},  bene  many 
kynde} ;  And  pat  is  better  pat  is  more  grene  and  pat  is 
founden  in  pe  yle  of  Crete  a ;  and  it  is  called  comonly  dra-  ^t"01- 
sp'ecfes,  4  gante,  bot  11031  dragagante,1  ffor  dragagant  is  a  white  guwme and  clere  like  vnto  gimme  arabic.  Also  per  is  a  spice  of 
vitriol  pat  is  called  vitriolum  romanu??i,  i.fe.1  coporose  ;  The 
2.  t  '    varieties. 
viridioris  And  it  is  or  3alow  colowr  in  reward  of  2  pe  grenner  vitriol. 
8  And  per  is  one  of  white,  colour  bot  no}t  schynyng,  and 
pat  is  seid  to  availe  to  pe  cure}  of  ei3en.     Vitriol  is  hote  b 
and  drye c  in  pe  4   degre  after  platear,3  And  per  ar  4   The  different 
maners  perof  :  Indicum,  pat  is  foureden  in  ynde,  and  pat 
1 2  is  white ;  Arabicum  pat  is  founden  in  arabye,  and  pat  is 
}elow ;    And  ciprinura  pat  is  founden  in  Cipre,  and  pat 
is  grene ;  And  romanu?«  pat  is  coprose,  pat  is  more  grene 
is  competent  to  medicyne.  It  hape  strenght  of  dissoluyng,   Uses- 
16  consumyng,  fretyng.d     It  may  be  kepte  by  10  3ere  effect- 
ualy.     Also  vitriol  combuste  be  itself  or  \\ith  salt  com- 
buste vputte  vpon  a  venemyd  wonde  drawep  pe  venym 
*  sb  inferius       fro  bynep  vnto  aboue.4     Also  puluer  of  vitriol  combuste  A  styptic 
20  streynep  blode  in  euery  place  if  it  be  putte  by  itself  or 
vfith   iuyse   of  any  herbe  streynyng   blode,  as   of   rede 
netle,  or  bursa  pastoris,  or  moleyne,  or  walwort.     Also  it 
is  seid  to  availe  agayns  polipe  in  pe  nose  if  it  be  putte  for  nasal 
24  into  pe  nose  -with  a  tente  of  coton  and  melle  rosette  medled 
\vith  }olk  of  an  ey ;  it  fretep  superflue  flesch,  and  putte  and  for 
into  a  fistule  mortifiep  it.     And   also  it  y-medled   vfiih  p 
B  uicera  diaquilon  or  apostolicon  and  y-put  vpon  fraudulent  vlcere}  5 
[lentaj.         28  in  dry  membre},  it  curep  pam  meruelously  in  drawyng, 
and  mortifiep  pam  and  fretep    pam.     Also  if    vitriol  be   Burnt 
.      ,  , .  ,  .  vitriol  less 
combust  it  is  lesse  mordicatyue,  but  his  dryne}  is  not  caustic, 
lessened,  fforsop  al  spice}  of  vitriol  bene  scharp  after 
32  lesse  and  more,  and  pai  haue  pair  scharpne}  in  pair  super- 
ficite ;  And  when  pai  ar  combuste  pai  bene  exsiccatyue 
w/t/iout  grete  mordicacion,  and  so  in  exsiccand  pai  gendre 
flesch,  and  most  in  drye  me??ibris  and  bodiej.  ffor  why  :  Vitriol  in the  strong 
36  Vitriol  v-put  to  diuerse  membris  or  diuerse  membris  6  it  is   and  healthy dries 
sene  to  haue  diuerse  effecte  In  dry  bodies,  for  as  coloric  wounds  and velmembr:s.  stimulates 
a  "  or  cipre  "  overlined.  b  "  caliches  "  overlined.  heal; 
e  "  siccits  "  overlined.          d  "  corrodyng  "  overlined. 


80 Damascene's  Vitriol  Plaster. 
in  the  weak 
and  feeble 
it  increases 
the  dis- charge. 
Why  vitriol acts  in  such 
contrary 
ways. 
John 
Damascene's vitriol 
plaster. 
Tlie  uses  of 
this  oint- ment ; 
and  nialencoliows ;  And  also  putte  in  dry  membre}  when 
it  fyndep  strong  membre}  agaynstayndyng  to  his  strenght, 
pan  may  he  no}t  bot  dry  superfluite}  y-founden  in  vlcere} 
or  in  wonde} ;  which  forsop  y-dried,  nature  genderep  flesch.  4 
In  moist  bodie},  forsope,  as  in  fleumatike  men  and  childre 
and  wywmen,  and  in  moiste  membre}  of  pe  bodie,  pe 
membre}  bene  feble  and  may  no}t  wi't^stande  to  pe  strength of  pe  vitriol ;  and  so  pai  suffre  liquefaccion  of  it,  and  so  8 
putrefaccion  is  augmented  in  pe  wonde.     And  as  it  wirkep 
pus  in  diuerse  bodie},  so  wirkep  it  in  diuerse  complexions 
and  diuerse   membris.     And  it  dope  no}t  pus  for   con- 
trariowste   of   operacion   pat   it   hape   in   itself,   bot   for  12 
contrariowste  of  complexions  to  which  it  is  y-putte ;  As 
fire  dop  diuersely  in  dyue?'se  pings,     ffor  whi ;   lede  or 
oper  metalle  as  bras  and  siluer  y-put  to  pe  fire  ar  molten 
of  pe  fire  ;  tyle,  stone},  and  erpen  potte}  y-putte  to  pe  fire  16 
ar  hardened  ;  and  pise  be  no}t  done  for  pat  pe  fire  hape 
contrariows  wirkyng  in  hymself,  bot  for  contrarioi^ste  of 
nature  of  pe  forsc'id  ping}.     *Wherfor  seip  galiene,  if  per 
be  tuo  pings  euen  in  helpe,    and  pe  tone  be  in  a  dry  20 
membre  and  pe  toper  in  a  moiste,  pat  pat  is  in  pe  dry 
membre  nedep  more  dry  medycyne.     Emplastre},  forsop, 
pat  ar  putte  to  membre}  owen  to  be  of   o  kynd  to  pe 
membrys,    after   lonn   Damascene :    Tak   of    vitriol   als  24 
mych  as  ]>ou  wilt,  i.[e.]  2   vnce}   or  3  or  4,  and  putte 
in  ane  erpen  potte  whos  moupe  be  wele  stopped  \viih  clay 
distemperate  \viih  horse  dong,  pat  is  called  lutum  sapien,1 
and  sette  it  to  dry;  pe  which  y-dried,  sette*  pe  potte  vtith  28 
pe  vitriol  among  cole},  and  make  a  softe  fire  by  one  houre ; 
And  after  ane  houre  make  it  stronger,  and  blow  strongly 
•wiih  belowe}  2  houre},  and  after  lette  in  pece  vnto  pat  pe 
fire  defaile  by  itself.     And  pe  potte  y-colded,  be  it  opned,  32 
and   pou  schalt   fynde    attrament,   i.[e.]  vitriol,   of  rede 
colowr  cleuyng  to  pe  side}  of  pe  potte ;  whiche  remoued 
fro  pe  potte,  be  it  poudred  subtily  vpon  a  stone,  and  putte 
it  in  a  strong  leper  bagge  and  kepe  it  to  pine  vse.    By  sich  36 
combustion  is  his  natural  hete  alterate  and  so  it  is  colded, 
and  so  his  mordicacion  is  dulled  ;  wherfor  it  may  restreyne 
blode  in  nose}  and  wounde}  and  lure  and  marice.     Also  it 
a  "birye  "  overlived. 
temperat. CUIH  timo 
vero  lutum 
dicitur. 


Alum  and  its  Uses.  81 
availe])  agayne}  be  cancre  and  agayn^  venemows  apostemej 
i  contra  and  fraudulente}  l  ;  And  to  tebe  or  gome}  freten  or  gnawen 
venen^sa  et        medled  vfith  symple  hony,  or  bette?'  vrith  melle  rosate;  Or fraudulenta 
hony  be  soben  to  be  pikne}  of  hony,  and  be  medled  with   wi*h  Hcium, 
puluer  of  vitriol   and   putte  vnto    be  gome} ;   ffor  whi ; 
luyse  of  caprifoile  bat  is  called  liciuw  availeb  bi  itself  to 
8  al  be  vice}  of  be  moube.     Also  vitriol  y-medled  witJi  hony 
and  liciim  putte  per-in  helpeb  to  vlcere}  of  ere},  and  to 
pe   quitowr  of  pam  and  fretyng.     Also  vitriol  combuste 
when  it  is  medled  with  puluer  of  hermodactile}  and  putte 
12  vnder-neb  be  tung  it  helpeb  to  be  ranule.a     Ane  oyntment  Anoint- J  inent  against 
pat   availeb  to  cancrose  vlcere j.  and  to  wondej,  and  to   plague blotches. 
aposteme},  of  which  nowep  out   blode,  and  to  yuel  car- 
buncle} pat  ar  called  pestilenciale},  and  to  aposteme}  bat 
16  ar  made  of  yuel  mater,  is  made  \us :  Recipe  of  old  swyne 
2  adipis  grese  2  §iii,  vitriol  giiii.     Be  be  grese  molten  oner  be  fire  & porci  vetus- 
tissimi.  be  it  coled,  and  breke  long  tyme  be  vitriol  with  one  in  a 
brazen  morter,  and  afterward  medled  with  pe  grese  ouer  be 
20  fire,  and   make  ane  oyntement  mych  fruyteful.     If  bou- 
wilt  make  it  in  mane?-  of  one  emplastre,  putte  pe?'-to  wax 
and  blak  pich,  for  pich  habe  strenght  or  vertu  of  drawyng 
fro  partie}  bineb  to  aboue,  and  be  same  dope  vitriol. 
24  20.      1    lum  }ucaryne  is  called  comonly  alumglasse.     It   Alum  glass, 
_£\_     is  hote b  and  dry c   in  be  4  degre.     It  is   a 
3  satis  veyne  of  pe  erpe  y-knowen  yno},3  bot  how  mych  it  is  more 
commune,          clere  &  schynyng  so  mych  is  it  better.    It  habe  strenght  of 
28  consumyng  and  of  gretly  desickyng.d    It  availeb  vrith  hote   its  uses, 
vinegre  agayn}  inflacions  of  pe  gome} ;  And  it  availeb  in 
medicyne}  agayn}  be  scabbe.     Also  poudre  of  it  combuste 
profiteb  mich  bi  itself,  or  y-medled  with  hony,  *in  muwdi-    [*  leaf  107] 
32  fying  of  li}t  cure}.  It  muwdifieth,  forsop,  with  a  stiptikrie},4 
stipicitate  and  in  pat  bat 5  it  is  stiptik  it  is  confortatyue  of  membre}, 
qu"d.°C  for  al  stiptik  ping}  bene  repressiue  of  humoz^-s.  ))er  is, 
forsope,  anoper  kynde  of  alum  pat  is  called  alumen  scissu??i,   Alum 
36  comonly  alum  plume,  and  it  hape  prede}  and  it  may  be 
diuided  and  ryuen  in  sondre.  And  it  is  ri}t  gode,  and  it 
hape  pe  same  vertue}  as  alum  glasse.  Alum  glasse  is 
a  "  frog  "  overlincd.  b  "  calidws"  overlined. 
c  "  siccws  "  overli/ii'il.  d  "  drying  "  overlined. ARDERXE.  G 


Verdigris  and  Arsenic. 
The  method 
of  preparing alum  glass. 
Alum  lotion. 
Verdigris and  its 
properties. 
Arsenic  and 
Aurijiig- uientum. 
brvnt  bus  :  Tak  a  tile  stone  or  a  scarbe  of  a  potte,1  and       l  Accipe 
unam  te- putte  it  in  be  midde}  of  brynnyng  cole}  so  bat  pe  cole}        guiam  vei 
touch  it  no^t,  and  in  bat  scarbe  putte  be  hole  pece  of  alum,       unius  oile. 
and  alsone  it  will  melt  as  it  war  yse,  and  boile,  and  after-  4 
ward  it  wexeb  hard ;  and  in  boilyng  it  will  blow  and  wex 
hi}e  in  drying  and  wexing  white.     And  lat  it  be  stille  so 
in  be  fire  vnto  be  blowyng  and  boilyng  vtterly  cese,  and 
to  it  be  bro}t  into  ful  white  cokmr ;  be  which  y-sene,  sette  8 
it  fro  be  fire  and  poudre  it  ful  smal  vpon  a  stone,  and  in  a 
leper  bag  kepe  it  to  bine  vse.    Water  of  alum  is  made  bi«s  : 
Tak  a  quaratite  of  it  als  mich  as  bou  wilt,  and  breke  it  at 
be  best.2  to  which  be  added  to  8  pa?*tie2  of  gode  vinegre  12  2  etteratur 
optime. and  strong,  and  so  boile  bam  in  a  panne  at  be  fire  vnto  bat 
be   half    parte    of    al-togidre   be   consumed.     Afterward 
remoue  it  fro  ]>e  fire  and  cole  it ;  And  bis  is  called  watre 
of  alum,  which  availeb  agayn}  ychyng  of  scabbe  of  salt  16 
flemne.     And  bis  watre  muwdifieb  in  coldand,  bot  watre 
of  sulphur  mmzdifieb  in  hetyng  or  chaufand.3  3  valet '  J     °  _  contraprun- 
21.  Viride  es  i.[e.]  vertgre},  is  hotea  and  drye.      It  is  ful       tumscabei 
penetratyue  and  dissolutyue,  and  it  prikkeb  and  brynneb  20  flemate  et 
and  melteb,  and  repressip  putrefaccion.     Wharfor,  after       mundificat 
galiene,  [cap.]  4  de  inge?uo,  of  wex  and  oile  and  vertgrese       dando,  sed 
may  be  made  anoyntement  temperate,    ffor  whi;   verte-       sui^huris 
grese  is  ful  mich  penetratife,dissolutiue,pungityue,vrityue,4  24  caiefaci- 
and  liquefactyue.     And  al  bise  ar  repressed  and  dulled  of       ^"uritinum. wex  and  oile  adde  to  it ;  for  sipe  wax  and  oile  moisteb  ri}t 
mich  and  gendrep  putrefaccion,  pai  dulle  be  scharpne}  of 
vertgrese,  And  vertgrese  repressep  peir  putrefaccion  and  28 
humeccacion ;  wherfor  of   bise   bene  made   a   tempe?*ate 
oyntement. 
22.  [~    A    Irsenic   &    auripigment    bene   bope   one,   bot 
[__/\.J  arsenic  is  no}t  so  fair  as  auripigment;  neper-  32 
lesse  bope  haue  a  3alow  colour,  but  auripigment  is  gretter 
and  more  schynyng,  and  more  disesy  for  to  grynde  for  his 
predine}  ;  for  in  substance  he  is  like  vnto  plaistre  of  paris. 
Bot  arsenic  is  as  it  war  puluer  in  reward  of  auripigment,  36 
and  it  is  more  li}tly  broken ;  And  when  it  is  broken  it 
hape  as  it  war  vermilion  \vithin  it,  of  rede  colowr  and  of 
colour ;  which  vukurenyng  men  saip  to  be  realgre,  & 
*  "  calidws  "  overlined.  b  "siccus"  overlined. 


Arsenic  is  to  be  iised  locally  with  caution.  83 
fat  is  false,    ffor  whi ;  realgre  is  ane  artificial  confection  Realgar » ......          .  .          IT,      not  identical 
i  secumium        made  of  alkenenustres1  bi  subhmacion,  as  arsenic  sublimed,   with modumalki-  .      ,   .  ..  ,    ,.«•          ,    •  ••  Arsenic, mistarum  id        And  for  certavn  bai  ar  nojt  different  in  operacion  in  any estalkenem-  7  . 
yers.  4  pmg,  out-take  fat  realgre  is  of  rede  colowr,  and  arsenic 
sublimed  is  of  white  colowr ;  bot  neferle^  arsenic  entref  in 
confeccion  of  realgre,  And  forbi  realgre  is  called  of  som   but  there  is nothing  in  a 
men  rede  auripigment :  of  be  name}  is  no  stryuyng  so  bat  name. 
8  we  vnderstond  be  bingj.     *  Auripigment  is  hote  and  dry  [*  leafiev, '  back] 
in  be  4  degre,  of  whiche  bene  tuo  spice3  as  is  seid  aboue, 
3elow  and  rede,     }elow  is  more  competent  to  vse  of  leche}. 
It   is   forsof  dissolutyue,  attractyue,  and  nuwdificatyue, 
12  And  it   hafe   in   it    a   vertue    putrefactyue    by    which 
he     putrefief  strauwge   humoz«-s   comyng  to   a  wounde, 
or   ane   vlcere,  fat   bai    may   no^t    be   assimilate,  i.[e.] 
liken  to  membre^,  and  engendre  superfine  flesch  or  dede 
16  flesch.     Also  it  availef  in  medicyne^  agayn^  be  scabbe,  be 
tetre  and  white  morfee  y-medled  wi'tft  blak  sope.     And 
for  bat  we  made  mencion  of  arsenic  sublimed,  f erfor  it  is   use  arsenic 
to  witte  bat  no  leche  bot  if  he  be  more  experte  in  cirurgie  w^ti/the8*1 20  presume  for  to  wirk  \vith  realgre  or  arsenic  sublimed,    ffor  Caution ; 
of   bam   ar  bredde   many  disese^   for   fair   distemperate 
violence,   ffor  why ;  bai  bobe  wirk  \vith  one  maner  and   they  are 
violence,  and  fat  more  violently  fan  cautery  of  fire.    And  than  fire. 
24  if  any  man  ow  for  to  vse  ba?w,  bam  owe  to  be  putte  to  in 
be  lest  quantite,  for  fe  vertu  of  bam  aboute  fire  is  be 
vinuseorum       vttennoste  of  streught,2  and  bat  is  schewed,  for  be  watre  of 
fnTiS™         ?am   fateV    euerv  naetaH,  out-tak  gold.     Witte  fou  fat 
f°rtitu'uod    ^  aurip^gmewt  is  called  comonly  ortment,3  whos  puluer  vsef 
Patet  falconerej  agayn^  pedicle} a  of  faire  falconBj.     Also  witte 
f ou  fat  auripigment  is  desiccatyue,  consumptiue,  euapora- 
tyue,  eradicatyue,  putrefactiue,  ruptyue  and  cauteriatyue. 
32  Also  witte  fou  fat  of  arsenic  sublimed  or  of  realgre,  fat   Arderne's 
01103  *n  a  tynie  in  fe  bigynnyng  of  my  prac^ing,  when  I   ence^Fth'1 
knew  no3t  fe  violence  of  fam,  I  putte  of  fe  puluer  of  fe  i^was™ 
tuo  forsayd  in  f  e  legge}  of  tuo  men ;  f e  which,  forsof e,   you 
36  y-putte  in,  almost  f  ei  wer  wode  for  ake  bi  tuo  daie3  naturel 
and  more ;  And  fair  Iegge3  war  bolned  out  of  mesure.     Jje  he  tho,,g|lt 
frid   daie,  forsofe,  fe  place  wher  fe   pulue?*  was   putte  kintcuwo 
appered  of  ri3t  blak  colowr,  and  f  e  paciente3  war  so  feble  i'auents ; a  "Use"  overlincd. 


84 Arderne's  experience  of  an  Arsenic  Dressing. 
his  treat- ment of 
them. 
The  tibia died, 
[*  leaf  168] 
and  a 
sequestrum formed, 
which 
Arderne  did 
not  notice 
for  some 
time. 
1  apposui 
larduiu 
crudutn 
tenue incisum, 
2  de  3p  in  3» 
fat  fai  war  almost  dede.     ))an  I  anoynted  fair  legge}  with 
oile  of  rose  or  popilion,  And  I  fomented   fe  leggis  in 
hote  water  for  to  euapowr  yuel  humowrs  contened  in  fe 
membre} ;  And  aboue  f  e  place  I  putte  rawe  larde  kytted  4 
f  inne,1  with  oile  of  rose.     Aboue  f  e  larde  putte  I  ane 
emplastre  of  fe  }olke}  of  raw  egge},  And  stuppe}  of  lyne 
aboue  for  to  hold  f  e  larde.    And  aboute  f  e  9  daie  fe  place 
combuste  beganne  to  dissolue  in  fe  circumference  and  for  8 
to  putte  out  quiter.     And  fe  place  no}t  reparate  bot  fro 
fe  frid  day  to  fe  frid  daye2  I  continued  eue?'-more  fis  cure 
in  fe  forseid  maner,  vnto  fat  al  fe  mortified  flesch  -within 
was  fully  putte  out  fe  which,  forsof,  putte  out,  fe  bone  of  12 
fe  leggea  appered  bare  with  a  wounde  ri}t  horrible;  fe 
which  y-sene,  I  filled  fe  wonde  of  stupe}  y-kitte  smallc, 
and  putte  fam  aboue»fe  naked  bone;  and  I  putte  in  of  fe 
}olk  of  a  raw  egg  wele  temperate  with  sangwine  veneris,  16 
and  I  filled  al  fe  wounde  f  e?--with ;  and  so  euery  day  one} 
reparalyng  it  vnto  fe  quiter  biganne  to  cese,  and  fe  side} 
of  fe  wounde  byganne  for  to  sonde  or  conglutinate.     And 
witte  fou  fat  when  fe  side}  of  fe  wounde  come  to  fe  20 
place  of   fe  bone  cauteri}ide   of  fe  arsenic,  which  was 
blakke,  *fai  mi}t  no  more  grewe,  for  fe  mortified  bone 
mi}t  no}t  receyue  nutriment,  fat  fer  mi}t  no  flesch  grew 
vpon  it,  ne  be  regendred.     ))e  which  }itte  sene,  I,  sewyng  24 
fe  ignorance  of  fe  comon  puple,3  euery  day  I  schoue4  fe       3  Quoadhuc 
bare  bone  with  instrument  p?-eparate  fer-to,   entendyng       uttSuorulgl 
for  to  gendre  flesch  vpon  fe  bare  bone.     And  I  putte  to       r^rali"8 regeneratyue}   of  flesch,  fat   is  to  sey  liciu?w  with  mel  28 
rosate,  and  puluer  of  aloes,  &  mastike,  and  mirre,  sarcocoH, 
san.    dracoms,   and    fai    profited    nofing.     Neferle}     fe 
schauying  euery  day  continued  in  fe  maner  of  ydiote}, 
as  I  seid  afore ;  a  daye,  as  I  schoue  f  e  forseid  bone,  f  e  32 
bare  bone  vnder  fe  instrument  moued  vp  and  downe; 
fat,  forsof,  perceyued,  I  meruailed  ouer  mesure,  neferle} 
I  perceyued  of  fat  fat  fe  schauyng  of  fe  bone  p?-0fited 
nofing  :  fro  fan  forf e  I  lef te  fat  werk,  and  I  putte  nofing  36 
elle}  in  f  e  wounde  bot  licium  with  melle  rosate  and  }olk 
of  a  raw  aye  yrnedled  togidre,  with  carped  stupe}  of  lyne, 
and  so  fro  day  to  day  continuyng  vnto  fe  forseid  bone, 
a  "  schine  "  overlined. 


Licium  and  its   Uses.  85 
flesch  growyng  vnder-nepe  appered  hi^er  pan  pe  extremite^ 
of  pe  woimde,  and  was  made  more  moueable  and  more ; 
pe  which  ysene,  I  putte  pe  poynt  of  a  knyfe  vnder  pe  side   He  removed 
4  of  }>e  bone  and  I  raised  it  a  litel,  and  al  pe  bare  bone  stirt  bone  and  the 
out,  and  rede  flesch  had  filled  al  pe  space  where  )>e  bone  q°tekiy 
laye,  and  blode  went  out.    Jjat  bone,  forsope,  had  in  length  healed- 
4  ynche^,  and  2  in  brede  ;  in  pikne^,  forsope,  it  was  drawne 
&  out  almost  vnto  J>e  merewgh  of  ]>e  bone ;  And  pis  was  in 
pe  schyne  bone.     After  pe  seperacion,  forsope,  of  pe  bone, 
I  cured  finaly  pe  wounde  \viih  licium  and  mel  rosate  and 
raw  ^olk  of  an  ey  and  puluer  sine  pari.     And  pe  pacient  The  second 
12  recouered  wonderfully  his  goyng;  he  was,  forsope,  a  jong  similar, 
man.     And  as  it  feH  on  pe  tone  man,  one  pe  same  maner 
felle  it  of  pe  toper.     And  witte  pou  pat  I  putte  no^t  of 
puluer  of  arsenic  in  pe  legge}  of  pe  forseid  men  ouer  pe 
16  quawtite  of  a  corne  of  senvey,1  and  neperlesse  pe  wonde^ 
pat  come  of  pe  arsenic  passed  fully  pe  lengthe  and  pe  brede 
of  a  mawne}  hande.     Jjerfor  vnexperte  men  be  wele  war  therefore  use 
fro  pe  vse  of  realgre  and  arsenic  sublimed,  and  namely  in  the  greatest 
20  pe  face  and  pe  legge^,  and  synowy  place}  and  bony,  and  in 
a  marene}  3erde,  and  in  pe  lure ;  for  bot  if  pai  haue  grete 
resistence  pai  wirke  ful  cruely. 
23.  [Ljicium  is  pe  iuyse  of  caprifoile,  pat  is  called  wode-   Licium  or 
24  bynde,  and   it   growep   in  wodej  and   wyndep   strongly  'woodbine, 
aboute  tree} ;  and  it  hap  long  floure^,  and  it  berep  swete 
rede  berie^.     Liciu?«  curep  pe  canker  in  pe  marice  and  in 
oper  inward  membre},  for  it  hape  vertu   muwdificatyue, 
28  consolidatyue,  and  confortatyue,  and  regeneratyue  of  flesch 
in  a  bare  bone  and  in  schynne  bone} ;  and- it  hape  a  vertu 
muwdificatyue  of  putrefiyng  of  pe  bone.     And  generaly  it   its  uses, 
availep  in  al  fretyng  sekene},  as  in  cancre,  lupe,  fistule, 
32  and  noli-me-tawgere.     And  agayne  pe  cancre  in  pe  moupe 
liciu??i  is  a  principal  medicyne,  boiled  wit7t  hony  vnto  pe 
pikne^  of  pe  hony.     And  it  may  be  ]>us  made  :  pe  iuyse   Various 
schal  be  pressed  out  and  sette  to  pe  son  for  to  dry  vnto  tions : 
36  pat  it  may  be  puluerijed.     And  pis  pulueri^ed  availep  to  r°wder  is 
derke  eijeri,  putte  in  pe  ei^,  and  forpi  is  called  oculus  lucidz^.    ty^s, 
*Bot  it  maybe  made  profitably  oper  wyse,  availyng  to  ful  [*  leafios, •     •  o  -f   -i  i     back] 
cause  of  cmir<;ie,  &  pat  \us  :  pe  iuyse  of  caprifoile  pressed 
1  "a  mosterd  sede "  overfilled. 


86 The  preparation  of  Pulvis  sine  pari. 
the  juice with  honey for  the 
mouth, 
and  for 
ulcers 
everywhere. 
It  is  ex- tracted with 
wine  instead 
of  water, 
and  is  then 
used  for  foul 
ulcers. 
Arderne 
used  it 
successfully 
on  a  great man. 
Pulvis  sine 
pari, 
its  con- stituents 
and  prepara- tion. 
The  reason 
for  its  name: 
its  uses, 
out  bi  itself,  be  it  boiled  with  alse  mich  of  clarified  hony 
vnto  fe  wastyng  of  fe  iuyse,  and  be  it  kepte  vnto  vse. 
And  fis  availef  to  fe  cancre  in  f  e  mouf  e,  and  in  f  e  lure, 
and  in  fe  marice,  and  al  cancrose  vlcere}  and  fraudulent}  4 
of  legge}.     If  fe  iuyse,  forsof ,  may  no}t  li}tly  be  pressed 
out  for  f  e  fikne},  als  it  fallef ,  oft  tyme,  fan  be  f  e  lefe} 
watred  with  gode  white  wyne  or  rede,  and  J>an  may  f  e 
iuyse  li}tly  be  pressed  out.    ffor  whi ;  witte  f  ou  fat  capri-  8 
foile  owe  no}t  to  be  waschen  witli  watre  afore  f  e  brissyng, 
and  moste  when  fer  owe  to  be  made  liciura  to  cure}  of  f  e 
ei}en,  Bot  if  it  nede  alwaie}  to  be  wette,  be  it  no  maner 
done  with  watre  bot  with  wyne,  as  it  is  seid.     Also  lefe}  12 
of  caprifoile  brissed  by  fam-self  and  with  al  his  substance 
without  medlyng  of  any  ofer  f  ing,  putte  vpon  vlcere}  of 
legge}  desperate  &  stynkyng,  and  puttyng  out  foule  blode, 
and  growyng  hi}e  to  mane?'  of  a  cancre,  and  vnobedient  to  16 
any  medicyne,  curef  f  am  happily  and  meruelowsly.     And 
fis  proued  I  in  ]>e  legge  of  a  grete  man  hauyng  a  pustle, 
In  curyng  of  which  al  medicyne}  defailed ;  and  with  Jus 
was  he  cured,    ffor  whi ;  f  e  first  tyme  fat  it  was  putte  to  20 
it  dried  fe  fistule,  and  did  away  fe  stynkyng  and  al  fe 
yuel  accident},  and  within  a  mone]>  he  was  plenarely  cured. 
24.  [Pluluis  sine  pari,  or   french  Poudre  san}  pere,  is 
made  )ms  :  Recipe  auripigment.    pa?*te  1,  fat  [is]  sii;  vert-  24 
grese  ana,  or  after  som  men  partes  ij  ;  Of  vitriol  combuste, 
or  no}t  combuste,  als  mich  as  of  bof e  f e  forseid ;  Alum 
}ucarine  combust,  or  no}t  combuste,  als  mych  as  of  al  fe 
forseid.     Ich  on  of  f ise  bi  famself  be  ful  subtily  grouden  28 
on  a  stone,  fe  which  wele   y-growdeu,  be  fei  eft-sone 
grouden  al  to-gidre  vnto  f  ai  be  ri}t  wele  medled  ;  and 
putte  f  am  in  lef  er  bag,  and  kepe  to  vse  :  f  is  may  be  kepte 
bi  a  }ere  and  longer,  and  fat  in  gret  effecte.     Jjis  poudre  32 
is  seid  "wit/tout  pere"  ffor  it  hafe  no  pere  in  wirchyng ; 
ffor  why  ;   it  mortifief  and  bryngef  out  dede  flesch  or 
superfine  or  putred  in  al  wonde}  and  vlcere}.     And  witte 
f  ou  fat  f  is  puluis  bigilef  neuer  f  e  paciente  ne  f  e  cirurgene,  36 
for  it  dof  not  wickedly,    ffor  whi ;  if  fe  cirurgene  bene 
vnkuwnyng  and  putte  fis  pulm's  in  a  wonde  or  in  ane vlcere  no}t  hauyng  dede  flesch,  it  dof  none  harme  to  fe 
wonde  or  f  e  vlcere ;  bot  without  any  o\>er  help  it  schal  40 


Pulvis  sine  pari.  87 
at  pe  best  be  conglutinatiue,  dissiccatyue,  and  sanatyue  of 
pe  wonde ;  bot  nepe?'lesse  no^t  without  mordicacion.    ffor, 
for  certayne,  if  pis  pulin's  war  no^t  mordicatyue  it  schuld 
4  in  prise  passe  al  medicyne}.     )je  vse  of  }>is  pulm's  is  sich ;  »«d  method 
when  pis  pulm's  is  putte  in  a  woimde  or  in  ane  vlcere,  be  tion. 
per  putte  to  it,  without  any-piug  atuix,  cotone  or  stupe}  of 
lyne  cutte  smalle  with  schere}  ;  And  pan  aboue  al  pat  be 
8  put  aboue  emplastre  Nerbone  or  anoper,  and  be  it  bounden, 
and  so  latte  it  be  wipout  remouyng  by  two  nyghte}.    *  After    [*  leaf  169] 
pis  tyme,  forsop,  when  pou  remoue}  pe  emplastre  and  pe 
coton  or  pe  stupe}  putte  aboue  pe  pulm's,   If  ]>e  puhm 12  putte  in  go  willfully  out  \fitfi  pe  dede  flesch  J)i  nede}  is 
wele  sped.  Jjan  owe  pou  for  to  putte  in  pe  hole  of  J>e 
vlcere  or  of  )>e  wonde  a  drop  or  tuo  of  sanguis  veneris, 
with  stuppej  of  lyne  or  coton,  vnto  pot  J?e  hole  be  eft- 
16  sonej  replete   wi't/i   flesch.      And   if,  forsoj),  in  J>e   first  Th«treat- 
remouyng  Jje  pului's  putte  in  come  no3t  wilfully  out  vriih   wound  with J>e  mortified  flesch,  pan  ow  pe  lech  for  to  putte  o  droppe  or 
tuo  of  sangwis  veneris  vpon  pe  pulm's  in  pe  wounde  or 20  pe  vlcere,  and  aboue  coton  or  stuppe}  of  lyne,  as  it  is  seid. 
And  aboue  al-togidre  pe  emplastre  Nerbone ;  and  so  lat 
it  abyde  by  a  naturale  day  or  more  after  pe  estimacion  of 
pe  discrete  leche.  And  when  pe  dede  flesch  gop  out  of  pe 
24  vlcere  or  of  pe  wounde,  be  it  reparailed  as  it  was  seid  afore. 
And  to  a  leche  be  pis  a  reule,  pat  pulm's  corrosyue  be  TWO  good neuer  remoued  in  a  wonde  or  ane  vlcere  byfor  pat  it  wille  surgeon*— 
wilfully  go  out.     Also  ]>er  is  anoper  reule  in  which  I  haue  caustic 
28  sene  erre  in  my  tyme  almost  al  men  no^t  practi^owrs  bot  remairrtm 
fole^  ;  pat  is  to  say  of  pe  ofte  remouyng.  of  wounde}  or  cast  out. 
viceroy.     Siche  operation,  for-sope,  spedep  no^t,  bot  lettep  $e£° " 
couenable  effecte  of  curyng.     And  pat  by  pis  reson,  for  JSJ^**00 
32  natural  hete  in  pe  body,  which  is  principal  ackwr  of 
curyng,  expirep 1  out  of  ofte  remeuyng  of  a  wounde  or  of 
ane  vlcere,  and  so  is  letted  digestion  of  humoz<rs  comyng 
to  be  wounde  or  to  be  vlcere.  Wherfor  ber  may  nojt  be  The  results 
,  r    .L  ofneglect- 36  nade  generacion  of  quitowr  and,  by  sewyng,  ne  purgyng  ing  these 
of  pe  wounde.  'Wherfor  superfine  humowrs  rennyng  to  pe wounde  ar  gedred  togidre  and  ar  holden  stil  more  and 
more ;   wherfor  pe  bolnyng  in  pe  wounde  is  augmented 
1  "brebeb"  overlined. 


88  Various  practical  points  in  the  treatment  of  Wounds. 
and,  by  sewyng,  pe  ake  ;  for  pe  tone  is  occasion  of  pe  toper. 
Wherfor  pe  wounde  or  pe  vlcere  waxep  hard  and  foule, 
and  for  pe  quitowr  pat  it  owed  of  ri}t  to  putte  out,  it 
sendep  out  watry  humowr  &  venemoz/s,  and  so  ofte-tyme}  4 
of   li}t  hurtyng  ar  made  incurable  yuele}.     Also  per  is 
anoper  errour  in  ofte  remeuyng  of  wounde}  or  of  vlcere}  ; 
ffor  as  seip  philosophre},  aier  chaungep  pe  body  and  by 
consequens  J)e  wounde,  and  pat  may  be  proued  by  ex-  8 
Amenstru-     perience.     be  breb  of  a  mewstruoM^  woman  noyeb  vnto ating  woman 
is  noisome      wounde}  if  sche  nejen  nere  :   Or  of  be  lech  if  he  haue to  wounds,         .  *t          .         . 
liggen  \rith  his  wife  or  wt'tft  anope/1  woman  menstruate,  or and  so  are      jf  }ie  haue  eten  garleke  or  onyons.     Bot  be  bis  maner  of  1 2 garlick  and  J 
onions.  wirchyng  boldly  holden,  bat  a  lech  be  content  only  of  ane 
Dress  a  reparacione  in  J>e  day,  pat  is  if  he  haue  )>e  medicynej 
a  day  only,  contened  in  bis  boke.  ffor  when  he  sebe  a  wounde  or  ane 
vlcere  wele  cast  out  quitow,  and  pe  bolnyng  for  to  vanysh  16 
away,  and  J>e  akyng  for  to  be  cesed,  and  J?e  membre  for 
to  come  agayne  to   be  first  habite  and  colour,  helbe  is 
at  be  dore  if  be  pacient  be  we[le]  gouerned,  i.[e.]  if  he 
The  value  of  slepe   wele  in  ni^tes.      In   slepe,    forsob,  nature   wirkeb  20 
sick  man.       better    aboute   digestion   of   euery   mater    beyng   in    be 
body  or  in  be  membris.      Bot  for  pat  slepe  is  oftynie 
letted  of   akyng,   berfor  bifore  al    ping}  be  it  laboured 
[*  leaf  169,     bat  be  akyng  be  cessed.    *ffor  akyng^  afor  al  o]>er  bings  24 
nojt  only  pressep  downe  vertue^  of  be  body  but  also  of  be 
soothing  ar-  medicynej.     And  pat  bins  soueranly  mitigateb  oile  of  rose plications. 
in  hote  cause,  or  oile  of  camamille  in  cold  cause,  for  it 
is  hote  and  resolutyue,  of  which  it  schal  be  seid   after-  28 
ward.     Also  ane  emplastre  of  hony  and  branne  and  a  litil 
vinegre  fried  togidre  mitigatep J  euery  akyng  for  certayne. 
And  witte  pou  pat  po  ping}  pat  ar  putte  aboue  makep  to  pe 
closyng-in  of  natw/'ale  hete  and  excludyng  of  pe  aier.    Be  32 
pise  ping}  seid  afore  of  remeuyng  of  wounde}  and  vlcere} 
comended  wele  to  mynde ;  And  be  it  done  boldly  as  it  is 
Ardeme         seid,  ffor  oftyme}  in  many  case}  I  was  no}t  wount  for  to used  to  dress 
his  wo-.mds     remoue  hot  fro  pe  prid  day   into  be  prid  day,  and  bat  36 every  third  "  '       '  J 
day.  namely  in  hurtyng  of  pe  schyraie} ;  and  I  sped  wele,  And  I 
cured  many  hard  ping}  and  forsaken  of  ober  men  wit/ipis 
pulm's  sine  pari  and  ope/'  emplastre}  y-named.      And  I 1  ' '  esep  "  overlined. 


Pulvis  sanguis  veneris.  89 
saw  neuer  in  al  my  tyme  pis  forseid  puluw  defaile,  out- 
take  in  pe  legge  of  a  gret  man  in  which  it  mi?t  no?t  haue 
no  strength  of  wirchyng  as  it  was  wont  for  to  haue  in 
4  oper;  wherfor  I  was  hugely  astoned,  bot  neperle?  I  heled 
hym  wele  with  grene  licium  putte  pe?-to,  our  lorde  beyng 
mene,  as  it  is  seid  aboue. 
iT).   f   A    ~|nd   for  pat  many  men  couaitep  for  to  here 8          L-£J-  J  name?  of  oile?  and  of  em  piastre?  and  of  oynte-   Pulvis  san- '  ''       ,  guis  veneris, ment?,  perfor  I  haue  putte  fair  name?  to  pam.  One  for 
pe  rednes  and  swetne?  is  called  sanguis  veneris.  Of 
french,  forso}>,  for  ladie?  is  called  sank  damowrs  or  sank  de  called  in 
1 2  pucell,    ffor   why ;     venus   was   called   godde?  of  luffe.    d'amour,  or 
Sanguis  veneris   ow   pws   to  be  made  :  Hecipe  pulm's  of  puceiies. alcannet  §1.  and  putte  it  in  a  qwart  of  comon  oile,  and  pe 
oile  schal  become  rede  to  likne?  of  blode,  wheper  it  be 
16  boiled  at  pe  fire  or  no?t,  for  it  may  be  made  on  hope 
maners ;  and  be  it  kept  to  vse  in  ane  erjjen  potte  or  a 
pewdre  potte.  bis  mane?-  of  confeccion  of  sanguis  veneris  its  mode  of .  preparation : 
is  ri?t  gode  for  J>e  alkenet  pat  is  cold  and  drye  in  J?e  first  0)  forordin- 
20  or  second  gre.  ffor  pis  alkenet  consume])  humidite?  of 
wounde?  and  of  vlcere?,  for  it  is  subtiliatyue  and  resolu- 
tyue  wi't/iout  mordicacion,  and  carminatyue  &  appe?'tyue, and  exsiccatyue  \viih  stiptikne?.  Wherfor  it  is  gode  in 
24  hote  aposteme?  vfiih  litel  mater  in  fe  bygynnyng,  for  it  is 
cold  and  drye  and  perfor  it  is  repercussyue  and  exsiccatyue 
of  hote  aposteme?.  Also  it  helpej)  to  synues  and  iuwcture?, 
and  vlcere?  of  pe  moupe  in  drying.  And  it  medled  with 
28  vinegre  &  ynoynted  helpep  to  ]>e  akyng  of  pe  heued.  San- 
guis veneris  helep  wele,  and  purge}),  and  defende])  fro  drede 
depe  wounde?  made  wyth  knyfe  or  arow,  and  holow  vlcere?, 
if  it  be  putte  in  with  stuppe?  of  lyne,  And  emplastre 
32  Xerbone  putte  aboue,  And  it  dope  al  ping?  pat  pertenep  to 
cure  of  a  wounde  or  of  aposteme,  and  fat  in  n  fair  maner. 
Bot  witte  pou  pat  Sanguis  veneris  may  be  made   on      [leaf  no 
anoper  maner,  and  pat  to  noble  men,  if  pe  lech  may  haue   (u)  for  the 
36  in  tyme  of  his  confection  al  pings   necessarye   vnto  his   classes. 
confection,  pat  is  to  sey  pe  blode  of  a  maiden  virgyne  or 
of  a  maiden  damisel  about  19  or  20  ?ere,  which  was  neuer 
impregned,1  pof  sche  be  corrupte;  for  now  in  pis  tyme? 
1  "  with  child  "  ovcrlined. 


90  Unguentum  Salus  populi. 
virgine}  comej)  ful  seldome  to  20  $ere.     Which  blode  ow 
to  be  drawen  out  in  be  ful  of  be  mone,  be  mone  beyng  in A  prescrip- 
tion for          v«rgme  and  be  sonne  beyng  in  piscibj.     Also  it  bihouejj 
confection      be  lech  haue  to  bis  confection  aloes,  &  mirre,  &  sangt^'s  4 
venerif!*13      dr&conis,  and  pulm's  of  alkenet.     And  bus  is  it  made : Recipe  blode  of  a  maid,  as  it  is  seid  afore,  to  be  which 
alsone  after  be  drawyng  out,  or  it  be  cold,  niedle  pulm's  of 
aloes  cicotrine,  mirre,  sangm's  dv&conis  ana  3!  or  2  or  3,  8 
after  be  quawtite  of  be  blode ;  of  subtile  pulu/s  of  alkenet 
als  niich  as  of  al  be  tober.     And  al  bise,  forsobe,  be  wele 
medled  with  be  blode  in  maner  of  a  paste,  and  afterward 
dry  it  at  be  son:  when  it  is  drie  kepe  it  to  bine  vse.  12 
A  method  of  When  bou  wilt,  forsobe,  vse  be?-of ,  tak  a  party  of  it  or  al, 
confection      and  poudre  it  wele,  and  sebe  it  in  grene  oile  of  olyuej  als 
veneris.         mich  as  sufficeb ;  bat  is  to  ane  vnce  of  be  forseid  confec- 
tion bou  ow  to  putte  2  Ib.  of  oile,  bat  is  a  quart  of  a  galon,  16 
or  more  if  it  be  nede,  and  boile  bam  togidre  vnto  bat  be 
oile  appere  rede ;    which  beyng  rede,  putt  it  of  be  fire, 
(sette  it  of  be  fire)  and  kepe  it  to  bine  vse.    And  when  it  is 
boiled  cole  it  no^t  bot  lat  it  abide  with  be  oile,  for  it  will  20 
satle  in  be  grounde,  and  so  it  will  strengbe  be  medicyne. 
Anointment   26.   F   A   In  oyntment  bat  is  called  Salus  pop»li  is  made called  Salus  /\ 
Popuii.  L>m_J  bws :  Recipe   celidon  M.  ij,  ede?'e   terrestris ] 
M.  i,  and  brysse  bam  togidre ;  and  afte?-ward  take  hertej  24 
talow  or  schepej  talow  or  bobe,  als  mych  as  sufficeb  to  be 
The  method    quantite  of  be  herbe?  ;  And  of  oile  of  olyue  als  myche  als ofitsprepar-    ^ ation,  half  of  be  talow  ;  and  boile  al  with  be  forseid  herbe3  vnto 
bat  be  herbej  go  to  be  grounde  of  be  vessel  and  be  made  28 
blak;  afterward  cole  bam  and  lat  bam  cold,  and  kepe  it 
to  vse.     }5is  oyntment  is  hard,  and  berfore  when  it  is  nede 
how  to  use     to  vse  it  take  of  it  and  putte  in  ane  holow  oistre  schelle 
and  melt  it  aboue  cole^,  or  aboue  a  brynnyng  candel ;  And  32 
wher  bat  nede  is  anoyte  ]>erwith.     And  witte  bou  bat  it 
and  in  what  ow  no^t  to  be  putte  in  wounde^  or  vlcere}  bot  only  about 
bam  wit/ioutforbe,  bat  is  if  be  skynne  about  be  wounde 
be  fiaien  or  skalded  of  hete,  or  if  it  haue  many  pusche^ 2  36 
u,e  a  &  smale,  white  or  rede  or  blak ;  ban  be  be  skyn  first  wele 
n°rstentat'0n    fomented  with  a  sponge  &  hote  watre,  And  after  bat  it  is 
1  "hayhoue,  folefote,  horshoue"  overlined. 2  ' '  blaynej "  overlined. 


Emplaster  of  Narbonne.  91 
dried  be  it  anoynted  with  bis  anoyntment  hote  aboue  be 
place  flaien  or  pusched,  And  alsone  -without  any  bing 
atuix  :  if  it  be  nede  in  grete  case}  bou  may  anoynte  it 
4  aboue  with  vnguento  arabico  or  with  comon  vnguento 
albo  for  to  kele  it  more  strongly  and  dry. 
Salus  popwli,  forsob,  dryeb  wele  and  sicatri^eb,  and  it  |jack]  '  ' 
availeji  at  be  best  to  lippej  y-brent  of  J)e  sone  or  chynned   its  mode  of 
8  of  be  wynde,  and  to  leggej  and  fete  and  hande}  ;  and  it 
availeb  agayn$  brynnyng  of  fire,  and  it  quenchef  be  wild 
fire  after  be  fallyng  of  be  pusche}.     )3is  oyntment  wold  I 
neuer  wante  for  many  benefetej  of  it,  And  witte  bou  bat 
12  it  is  best  remedi  to  fain  fat  habe  be  emoroides  or  be  fistule 
or  ope?1  sleiyng. 
27.   I  J\_  Ine  emplastre  bat  is  called  Nerbone  is  made  bus:   TheNerbon pl&stcr 
Recipe  diaquilon,  and  w?'t7i,  comon  oile  or  with  oleo  siriaco 
16  resolue  it  vp[on]  be  cole},  and  boile  it  alwaiej  with  a 
spatulre  vnto  it  bigynne  to  wex  blak.     And  if  bou  wil  The  method 
of  prepara- haue  it  ri^t  blak  boile  it  langer,  and  if  bou  wilt  haue   tion. 
broune  boile  it  lesse.    ffor  whi  ;  by  long  boilyng  it  may 
20  be  made  most  blak  without  medlyng  of  any  ober  bing. 
And  after  bat  bou  wilt  haue  it  hard  or  softe  be  added 
berto,  or  minusched,  oile  with  which  it  is  resolued.  "When 
it  hab  boiled  ynouj  sette  it  fro  be  fire  and  late  it  stande  TO  stand  so 
24  stille  without  mouyng  by  be  space  of  a  '  pater  noster  '  &  takes  one  to 
'aue  maria,'  bat  be  litarge  of  be  lede  bat  is  in  it  may  noster  and 
descende  to  be  grounde  ;  and  alsone  be  it  3ette  out  softly 
into  anober  panne  bat  be  litarge  be  no^t  3ette  out  withalt, 
28  and  ban  moue  it  wi'tA  a  spature  strongly  ynto  bat  it  be colded.     When,  forsob,  it  is  cold  bat  it  may  be  malaxed.   To  be  made 
into  pellets. enforme  beroi  trocistes  vpon  a  table  in  quantite  as  it  plesep 
be,  and  kepe  it  to  bine  vse.     )3is  ewiplastre  is  called 
32  bone,  for  bof-al  it  be  blak  neberlesse  it  is  gode,  for  it  helef 
wele  wondej  and  vlcere3,  and  it  is  wele  cleuyng  to,  and  it   whence  its 
mature))  wele  apostemej  and  bresteb  barn  in  any  place  of 
be  body. 
3628.  l_\JJleu??i    Siriacmn   is   bws   made:    Recipe   comon  siriacoii, 
maluej  of  gardynej,  fatte  &  f  resell,  and  somewhat  brisse 
hem  in  a  morter,  And  afte?'  boile  hem  long  in  comon  oile 
bot  no^t  vnto  be  cowsumyng  of  be  herbe,  bat  be  fatnes  of 


92 Ch'eek  Powder  and  Oil  of  Hoses. 
and  plaister. 
Unguentum Arabicum. 
[leaf  171] 
Pulvis 
Qrecus. 
Its  prepara- tion, 
and  uses. 
Oil  of  Roses. 
Its  prepara- tion. 
Another 
preparation, 
fe  malue}  "be  no}t  consumed.  And  if  fou  wilt  make  it 
f  ikke  to  mane?'  of  ane  eniplastre,  fan  ow  J>ou  for  to  putte 
with  f  e  oile  as  war  f  rid  parte  of  schepe}  talow,  and  boile 
hem  togidre  as  it  is  seid,  and  kepe  it  to  vse.  4 
29.  Vnguentum  arabicum,  Tapsimel  (in  ]je  last  end  of 
emoroide}),  Diaflosmos  :    seke  hem  in  f  e  tretyse  of   fe 
fistule}. 
30.  Pulm's  greets  is  f  us  made  :  Recipe  auripigment.  ci-  8 
trin.  piper,  nigri,  calcis  vine,  alphice,  i.[o.]  barlymele  ana, 
hony  clarified  partes  iij,  vinegre  fe  ferfe  parte  ;  be  pai 
medled  with  f  e  forseid  poudre}  in  maner  of  paste,  and  be 
per  made  a  kake  ferof,  and  be  it  baken  on  a  hote  tyle  12 
stone  ouer  f  e  fire  so  jjat  it  be  no}t  brent  bot  fat  it  may 
be  wele  poudred  vpon  a  stone.     And  when  it  bigynne]) 
to  wex  blak  on  pe  tile-stone  be  it  oftyme  turned  pat  it  be 
no}t  brent  bot  fat  [it]  be  perfitely  dried.    With  pis  pulm's  16 haue  I  cured  sich  fike}  puttyng  out  blode,  &  growyng  in 
pe  palme  of  a  maraie}  hand.     And  if  J>ou  haue  no^t  pului's greets  fou  may  do  fe  same  in  ]>e  forseid  fings  with  puluw 
sine  pari.    And  wytte  J>ou  fat  I  haue  oft  tyme  sene  pulm>  20 
greets  for  to  availe  in  J>e  cancre  of  a  manne,}  jerde,  and  in 
fike^  bredyng  fer-aboute. 
31.   [~/'~>V~|ile    of   rosej  is  \us  made :    Recipe  roses  fat LV-^J  bene  ful  spred,  and  gredre  hem  erly  while^  24 
fe  dew  lastef,  and  clyppe  hem  with  a  paire  [of]  schere3 
in  smale  pecys  and  do  hem  into  a  glasen  vessel,  and  do 
f erto  oile  of  olyue  of  f e  grenest  fat  ]>ou  may  fynde,  ana, 
&  medle  hem  wele  togidre  in  f  i  vessel  and  stoppe  it  wele ;  28 
And  hete  it  agayn3  fe  son  20  daie^  and  fan  draw  it  fur} 
a  kanuaj  and  cast  away  f  e  grounde}  of  f  e  rose},  And  putte 
fat  liquow  fat  comef  out  into  a  vessel  ajeyn  and  stoppe 
fe  vessel  fat  \er  come  none  aier  out.     And  ich  day  in  fe  32 
mornyng  when  f ou  schalt  hyng  out  fi  potte  tak  a  spature 
of  tre  and  opne  fi  potte  and  stirre  it  wele,  and  stoppe  it 
agayne  duryng  al  f  e  20  daies. 
Anof er  mane?-  [of]  makyng,  and  more  colde.     Recipe  3(5 
rose}  &  oile  ana,  and  schred  fi  roses  and  putte  hem  into 
a  vessel  of  glasse  with  fine  oile,  and  stoppe  it  wele.    And 
hang  it  into  a  vessel  with  watre  vp  to  fe  nek  duryng  tuo 
monefe},  and  euer  ich  day  stirre  it  one}  and  stoppe  it  40 


when  roses 
are  scarce. 
Oil  of  Violets.  93 
a^eyn.  And  after  jrat  streyne  it  and  do  away  fi  grounde} 
of  fe  rose}.  And  fis  is  more  cold  fan  fe  toper.  Also  it 
is  made  f  us  after  my  mane?-  and  myne  vse.  If  f  cm  haue 
4  no}t  plente  of  10863  take  of  white  roses  with  f  e  tendrons 
of  fe  braunche}  als  mych  as  fou  wilt,  and  brisse  fam  in  a 
morter ;  fe  which  y-brissed,  putte  fam  in  als  mych  comon 
oile  as  f  e  like)?,  and  so  latte  fam  rest  9  daies  ;  afterward 
5  boile  fam  vpon  softe  fire  vnto  f  e  oile  be  made  grene.    })an 
if  fou  may  haue  fresch  rose}  putte  fam  in  ane  erf  en  potte 
or  leden,  als  many  as  fe  likest;   and  be  fe  forseid  oile 
coled  hote  }ette  aboue  and  moued  togidre  with  a  spature, 
12  And  alsone  stoppe  fe  moufe,  fat  fe  vapowr  go  no}t  out. 
And  biry  fe  vessel  with  ]>e  oile  in  moist  erfe,  and  euery 
ofer  day  be  fer  jetted  cold  watre  about  fe  potte.  And 
be  it  Jms  done  40  daies  or  more,  &  fis  maner  confection 
16  schal  be  most  noble  oile  roset.  And  \us  ow  it  to  stonde 
al  J>e  hole  }ere. 
32.  Oile  of  violette}  may  be  made  in  J>e  same  maner.   [leafm, 
Bot  witte  ]>on  fat  oile  of  violettes  is  laxatiue  and  oile  of  o^of 
20  rose  constrictiue.    ffor  why;  if  oile  of  violett}  with  euen  Vlolets- 
porcion  of  iuyse  of  Mercurial  *  be  petted  in  by  a  clistery  in 
continuel  acuej  or  interpolate,  it  remollej?  softely  fe  bowelej 
and  puttej)  out  fe  supej'fluite^.    Oile  of  violet  ha]?e  aspecte   its  uses. 
24  to  membre}  fat  bene  dried  by  any  infirmite.  It  abate]) 
bolnyng}  wher  fat  euer  f ai  be  ;  And  it  softnef  f e  aspe?'ite 2 
of  f  e  brest  and  of  f  e  long,  and  it  cesef  pleuresy  and  hote 
aposteme}.  And  witte  f ou  fat  fer  is  tuo  manerej  of  oile  on  roset, 
28  roset,  complete  and  rude.  Complete  is  made  of  ripe  oile 
and  of  ful  rose}  ripe.  Rude  is  made  of  vnripe  oile  and 
of  rose}  fat  hafe  [not?]  fully  opned  fair  buddej.  Oile 
roset  complete  is  resolutiue,  confortatyue,  and  con- 
32  ueniently  cedatyne  3  of  akyng.    Rude  forsof e  is  extinctyue 
of  inflammacions,  confortatyue,  aggregatyue,  inspissatyue, 
p?'ohibityue  of  curse}  of  humours.     Oile  of  roses  is  special  how  it  acts, 
remedy  agayns  brennyng  and  hote  aposteme},  wher  fat 
36  euer  fai  be  in  fe  body,  ffor  whi ;  in  ane  or  tuo  putty ngs 
to  it  mitigatef  fe  akyng,  it  dullef  fe  furiosite  and  fe 
scharpne}  of  f  e  mater  ;  It  makef  f  e  place  for  to  vnbolne,4 
1  "  smerwort "  overlined.  2  "scharpnej"  ovcrlincd. 
3  "  cesyng  "  overlined.  *  "  swage  "  overlined. 


94 Oil  of  Camomile. 
It  should 
always  be 
kept  in stock. 
Preparation of  Oil  of 
Camomile. 
Another 
preparation when  the 
flowers  are 
scarce. 
[*  leaf  172] 
Its  uses. 
and  it  remeuef  fe  rede  colour.     ffor-sofe  it  swagef  and 
softenef  f  e  brennyng  &  f  e  prikky?zg,  f  e  smertyng  and  }>e 
akyng,  And  it  comfortef  f  e  membres  bof  in  hote  causes 
and  in  cold ;  ifor  after  auctowrs,  Oile  roset  coldef  ane  hote  4 
membre  and  hetej)  a  cold  mewbre.     And  it  dof  many  o]>er 
profitej  in  pe  body,  And  f erfor  a  gode  lech  pzmiey  hym  fat 
he  want  neuer  oile  rosette,  syf  e  f  er  procedef  so  many  help- 
yng3  of  it  to  maraie^  body,    ffor  why  ;  after  galien,  to  euery  8 
akyng  hote  oile  rosette  is  mitigatyue,  as  it  is  seid  afore. 
33.  r/^\~]ile  °f   camamille  is  \us  made :  "Recipe  cama- LV_y  J  mille  grene   and  fresch,  and  brisse  it  som- 
what  in  a  morter.      After  boile  it  \vith  a  softe  fire  in  12 
comon  oile  als  mych  as  suffice)).     And  putte  a  litel  watre 
in  f  e  oile  fat  f  e  herbe  in  seeing  be  no^t  brent ;  and  boile 
it  vnto  f  e  herbe^  go  doune  to  f  e  grounde  and  bigynne  to 
be  blak.     Which  y-done,  take  flowrs  of  camamille,  if  fou  16 
may  haue  fam,  and  putte  fam  in  ane  erf  en  potte;  And 
jette  J?e  forseid  oile  coled,  als  hote  as  it  may,  aboue  J>e 
floure^,  and  alsone  couer  fe  moufe  of  fe  potte  with  par- 
ch emyne  and  sette  it  ire  a  saue  place,     fforsofe  if  J>ou  may  20 
[not?]  haue  flows  of  camamille  in  tyme  of  J»i  confeccion, 
fan  in-stede  of  floure3  tak  M.i  of  f e  tendre  brauwche^  of 
camamille  and  putte  J>am  wit7i-out  any  brissyng  in  a  potte, 
and  putte  oile   ri^t  hote  vpon  fam,  as  it  is  seid  afore.  24 
*And  afterward  when  fou  may  haue  flowrs  of  camamille, 
take  fe  forseid  oile  with  fe  brairache^  of  camamille  and 
boile  fani  eftsone^  vpon  fe  fire ;  and  as  it  is  seid  afore, 
putte  to  a  litel  watre  or  elle3  a  litel  vinegre,  fat  is  better,  28 
fat  fe  oile  may  be  more  penetratyue,  and  boile  it  vnto  fe 
wastyng  of  f e  watre  or  of  f e  vinegre ;  and  fat  is  knowen 
by  boiling  of  f  e  oile  made  wit7i  noyse ;  fan  cole  it,  and 
^ette  it  ri3t  hote  vpon  fe  floure3  as  it  was  seid.     Oile  of  32 
camamille  is  temperate,  and  it  is  a  blissyd  fing  of  many 
helpyngs,  and  it  is  a  comienient  resolutyue,  and  of  akyng 
sedatyue,  and  it  is  prohibytyue  of  curse3  of  humours  for  a 
litel  stiptikne3  in  it.     It  comfortef  synowe}  and  al  synuy  36 
membrye3 ;  It  helpef  to  f  e  akyng  of  f  e  heued,  And  gener- 
aly  it  availef  to  al  akyng,  and  it  is  conuenient  to  al  com- 
plexions,  and   it   is  ri3t   subtile.      And  als  mych  as  it 
dissoluef  so  mych  consumef  it.  40 


Oil  of  Mastick  and  Oil  of  Almonds.  95 
34.  r/^V~|ile  of  masticMS  is  made  \>tis  :  ~Recipe  Masticws  on  of I      I  Mastick. 
LVy'J   3  1,  thun's  albi  alexandrie  5  \  ;  be  pai  pou-  itsprepara- dred  &  decocte  in  1  Ib.  of  oile  of  rose  or  of  almande}  or 
4  of  note}  ;  and  when  it  is  cocte  yno},  cole  it  and  kepe  it  to 
vse.     )?is  oile  helpep  to  euery  akyng,  of  pe  stomak,  of  pe 
Juncture},  of  pe  schuldre},  anoynted  agayne}  pe  fire,  and 
to  akyng}  of  pe  lyuer  and  of  pe  splene,  putte  to  hote  with 
8  lana   succida.       It    comfortep  vertu    assimilatyue    in   a 
mewbre  febled  ;  wherfor  it  helpejj  to  men  in  pe  ethic,  in 
pe  ptisik,  and  disposed  to  pe  lepre  and  to  pe  morfee,  and  to 
old  men  and  consumed.     And  anoynted   it  moistej)  pe   its  uses. 
1  2  skynne,  and  reuokep  and  restorep  pe  flesch  consumed,  and 
confortep  pe  stomak  and  make)?  it  to  diffy  in  cold  cause  ; 
it  repressep  pe  abhominaciones  of  }>e  stomak,  it  giffep 
appetite,  it  scharpep  pe  mynde,  It  consume])  al  cold 
16  passions,   It   availej?   to    hole   men    and    to   seke  in   al 
necessitej.     When  fou  wilt  make  fis  oile  agayn}  J)e  vices  Things  to  be ,.  ,,  i-i-j7M-          i-i  added  when 
of  J)e  stomak,  pan  may  pou  make  it  wtt/i  oile  in  which  ar  it  is  used  as 
sopen  som  pings  pertenyng  to  corafortyng  of  pe  stomak,  as 
20  wormode,  Mynt,  Macw,  galinga,  &  sich  oper,  And  so  schal 
it  better  spede. 
35.  r/^\~]ile  °f  almande}  is  made  ]>us  :  T&ecipe  amigdal.   on  of 
dula's,  old  &  no}t  new,  Ib.  |,  and  tak  of  pe   fts  p°repa'ra- 
24  skynne}  vfith  hate  watre  ;  afterward  brisse  pam  lang  &   tlon- 
wele  wz'tAout  medlyng  of  any  oper  ping  ;  which  y-brissed, 
be  pai  putte  in  a  new  strong  bagge  of  lynne  elope,  and 
hyng  pat  bag  ouer  pe  caldron  or  oner  a  potte  ful  of  boilyng 
28  water,  so  pat  pe  bagge  touch  no}t  pe  watre  hot  pat  only  it 
receyue  pe  fume  of  pe  boilyng  watre.     Afterward  presse 
pe  bag  strongly  and  receyfe  pe  oile  pat  comep  out  *  and   t*  leaf  172, 
kepe  it  to  pine  vse.     Bot  witte  pou  pat  pis  oile  may  no}t 
32  long  endure.     It  availep  mych  agayne  brynnyng  of  vryne   its  uses. 
wz't/an  in  pe  }erd,  If  it  be  cast  in  wyp  a  syryng,   And agayns  oper  brennyng}  also. 
36.   p\^\7~~]atre    °f    almande}    is    made  ]pus  :    'Recipe   Almond 36          L    »  »    J  almandes  dulces  clensed  of  pair  skynne} 
and  dryed,  and  brisse  pam  in  a  morter  without  medlyng 
of  any  oper  liquowr  ;  And  after  distille  pam  as  pou  dis- 
tillep  rose  watre.      Jpis    availep    agayn}   brennyng  of  pe 


96 Ointment  of  Juniper  and  a  good  plaister  for  the  Gout. 
Oil  of 
Juniper, 
liow  dis- tilled. 
Its  uses. 
Ointment  of 
Juniper. 
Its  prepara- tion 
and  uses. 
A  good plaister  for 
the  gout. 
Its  prepara- tion. 
[*  leaf  173] 
So  good  that it  should 
only  be shown  to 
one's  son. 
sonne  in  pe  face,  And  also  agayn}  bryraiywg  in  a  niannej 
}erd,  put  in  by  a  siryng. 
37.  r/^V~]ile  °f   lunipre    is  made  ]>us :    Hecipe  a  new LV^'  J  erpen  potte,  and  putte  it  into  pe  erpe  euen  to  4 
pe  moupe  ;  fan  tak  anoper  erpen  potte  whos  bothme  may 
be  receyfed  wz't/dn  pe  moupe  of  pe  potte  fat  standep  in  pe erpe  ;  And  putte  ane  holowe  canel  of  yren  pur}  pe  bothme 
of  pe  ouer  potte  into  JJG  neper  potte  pat  standep  wit// in  pe  8 
erpe  ;  pan  tak  dry  stikke}  of  luniperi  and  kutte  pain 
smal  and  putte  pam  into  pe  ouer  potte,  and  J>an  lute  pe 
moupe}  of  bope  pottes  wi't/i  clay  medled  -with  horsdong. And  make  a  fire  al  aboute  pe  ouermore  potte,  And  pan  12 
scha[l]  oile  distille  pur}  ]>e  canel  into  ]>e  lawer  potte,  pe 
which  kepe  for  pin  vse,  for  it  is  f ul  noble  for  akyng.  It  is 
gode  for  al  maner  goute  and  for  ]>e  parallesy. 
38.  f   A   llso  ane  enoyntnient  made  of   it  to    wonde^  16 
L-^»-J  ]>at   vnne])    bene    curable    and    long   tyme 
haue  bene  in  )>e  bone^ :  Hecipe  fruyte  of  lunipe?!  & 
fresch  lard  of  a  male  swyne  and  brisse  pam  togidre  ; 
Afterward  take  3  paries  of  ri^t  strong  white  wyne  and  20 
se]>e  J>e  forseid  pingj  in  it,  arid  when  it  is  pikke  sette 
doune  fro  pe  fire.  And  putte  perof  to  pe  forseid  sore^ 
<fe  wondej.  It  purge]>,  it  iillejj,  it  helej)  &  it  cicatrize)). 
39.  f   A   ~]  gode  emplastre  for  J?e  goute  :  Ttecipe  blak  sope  24 L-^*-J  als  mich  as  suffice)),  to  which  putte  als  mych 
of  raw  ^olke^  of  eyren  as  is  half  of  ]>e  sope,  and  medle 
f>am  strongly  in  a  dish  or  in  a  box  vnto  pat  pe  sope  lefe 
his  owne  colowr ;  pe  which  y-done,  putte  it  with  pi  fynger  28 
or  wit/i  a  spature  vpon  subtile  stupe^  of  lyne  and  applie  it 
faste  vnto  pe  akyng  place.     Aboue  pis  emplast?-e,  forsope, 
putte  a  strictorie  of  white  of  eiren  and  mele  of  whete  and 
lynnen  cloutej  y-dipped  perin,  and  putte  it  fast  &  applie  32 
it  aboue  pe  forseid  emplaster  pat  it  be  no^t  remoued  byfore 
dew  tyme,  bot  if  any  competent  cause  aske  it.     Jpis  niedy- 
cyne  is  li^t  *but  nojt  litel  effectual,  pat  haue  I  proued 
ofttyme},  als  wele  in  wymen  as  in  men;  pat  -with  one}  36 
puttyng  to  it  cesep  ful  grete  akyng}  als  wele  in  pe  knee} 
as  in  pe  fete  and  in  ope?-  ioynture} ;  bot  be-war  pat  it  be 
no^t  perceyued  of  pe  pacient  ne  of  none  oper;  hold  it 
pryue  and  chere,  and  schew  it  nojt  bot  to  pi  son  or  ane  40 


Walwort  and  a  Valence  of  Scabious.  97 
als  wele  biluffed.     I  trow,  forsop,  pat  it  availep  bifor  al 
oper  medicyne}  to  pe  goute,  and  more  sane  abate))  pe 
akyng.     And  it  o\v  5  daie$  or  6  to  lye   stille  without 
4  remeuyng  if  it  may  so  bene  applied. 
40.  [  \Vjalwort J  is  ane  lierbe  like  vnto  elfdlre  in  lefej  and   Waiwort and  its 
fruyte.     In  odow  it  is  su??^what  greuo?ts  and  stynkyng.   virtues. 
In  tast  it  is  as  war  bitter,  bot  in  vertu  anence  old  men  it 
8  is  deemed  expert  and  effectuale,  and  kynde  &  free  to 
medicyne   in   many   vsej ;   witnesse   pliniws,  diascoride},  Th* uses  of 
macrobu}  and  many  oper,  wlios  rote},  rynde},  and  branche} 
and  leue}  and  flourej  bene  profitable  in  medicyne}.     It 
12  hape  vertu  of  dissoluyng,  consumyng  of  gret  flemme  and 
viscose  wit/t  pe  iuyse  of  it.  It  availep  agayn}  J)e  gutte  of 
pe  ioynture}  and  contraccion  of  synue}  of  pe  lieude  &  of 
pe  fete.  It  availep  also  agayn}  bolnyng}  and  collections 
16  intercutanie}  wher-so-euer  ]>ai  bene  gedred  in  j?e  body. 
Also  it  availep  most  agayn^  brissyngs  of  membre^  and 
fallej,  if  ]>e  membre}  be  fomented  in  his  decoctions,  ffor 
why ;  it  mitigate])  J> e  akyng,  it  cesej)  J>e  bolnyng,  it  minis- 
20  trefi  vertue  and  strength  to  synowej  and  to  ioynture^.  It 
availej)  agayne}  bolnyng  of  J)e  womb  of  cold  y-dropisy,  if 
his  Iuyse  be  dronken  with  hony  and  comyne.  And  witte 
)>0u  J)at  ))e  Iuyse  of  walwort,  or  J?e  poudre  of  it  if  it  be 
24  hadde  redy,  is  namely  in  euery  medicyne  pat  is  restrictyue 
of  blode.  }?e  mane?-  of  makyng  and  kepyng  of  it  is  as  j>e maner  of  licium  seid  afore. 
41.  Valence  of  scabiows  or  of  lacee  albe  is  \>us  made:  A  valence  of 
28  J&ecipe  Iuyse  of  scabiows  in  somer,  and  cole  it  Jmr^  a  elope;  its  prepara- 
and  tak  swyne3  grese  clensed  of  pe  skynnej  and  stamp  it 
wele  in  a  morter  in  smytyng  it  bot  no^t  in  brekyng 
vtterly ;  and  eue?-more  putte  in  a  litel  of  pe  iuyse  to  pe 
32  grese  pat  it  may  wele  be  imbibed  and  pat  pe  talow  may 
be  made  grene ;  pe  which  y-doue,  tak  pat  grese  and  couer 
it  \vith  pe  forseid  iuyse  and  so  late  it  stand  9  daie}.  And 
after  9  daie^  take  eftsoue  pe  forseid  grese  wrtA  pe  iuyse 
36  and  stamp  it  as  afore,  and  putte  out  pat  pinne  watryne^ 
and  discolored  pat  gop  out  perof,  and  so  lat  it  stande  5 
daie}.     *  After  pe  5  day  el'tsone  tak  new  Iuyse  of  scabiows  [•  itnf  m, and  stamp  it,  as  it  is  seid,  vfith  pe  forseid  grese ;  pe  which 
1  "  ebulus  "  overlined. 
ARDERNE.  H 


98 Valences  of  Scabious  and  Absinthe. 
Its  uses. 
Whence  its 
name. 
y-doiie,  latte  it  rest  in  a  vessel  with  pe  iuyse  al  a  fourt- 
ny^t ;  which  tyme  oue?-passed,  eftsone}  bete  it  as  it  is  seid 
afore,  and  purge  it  of  pe  watrmej,  and  putte  it  in  a  clene 
vessel,  and  lat  it  stand  stil  anoper  fourtni^t,  And  pan  4 
brisse  it  wele  vnto  pat  it  be  al  of  grene  colowr.    And  whan 
pe  nedep  for  to  vse  perof,  as  vnto  pe  autrax,  putte  perof 
with  pi  fynger  vpon  clene  stuppej  of  lyne,  and  strech  it 
and  lay  it  on  pe  antrax  anoynted  with  oile  of  rose,  and  8 
remeued  it  no^t  by  a  nature!  day.     ffor  wMout  dout  it 
schal  slee  pe  antrax  and  swage  pe  akyng,  and  brist  it  and 
vtterly  cure  it.     And  pis  medyc[iii]e  is  called  Valence  of 
scabiows  for  pe  valow  of  it.     It  may  be  kepte  many  ^erej,  12 
bot  it  is  better  if  it  be  euery  ^ere  renewed  and  bette  newly 
with  oile  noses,  and  putte  vp  agayne  vnto  it  nede.     And 
witte  pou  pat  scabiozts  y-dronken  sleep  pe   antrax,  and 
putte))  away  pe  venym  of  it  fro  pe  hert  pat  it  sle  no^t  pe  16 
pacieut.     Also  pe  same  herbe  ydronken  t?^rnep  inward 
aposteme3  to  outward  and  puttep  pam   out   insensibily. 
Also  witte  pou  pat  new  scabiows  &  fresch  y-brissed  with 
swynes   grese   and  putte  vpon  antrax  sleep  it  in  a  day  20 
naturel,  and  takep  away  pe  akyng  for  certayne.     Bot  for 
pat  scabiows  may  no^t  euennore  be  had  redy  &  fresch,  \ar- 
for  was  pis  medicyne  made  pat  may  long  be  kept,  ]>at 
wonderfully  sleep  pe  antrax  and  vtterly  curep  it,  as  I  haue  24 
proued  myself  ane  hundrep  tymej.     Also  witte  pou  pat 
lacea  alba  is  scabious,  bot  lacea  nigra  is  matfelon.     And 
witte  POM  pat  pat  scabious  pat  growep  among  corne^  \vith 
ane  heuenly  fiour  is  better  pan  pat  pat  growep  in  mydowej  28 
pat  hap  no  &our.     After  diascorides  trowe  pou  to  pis  pat 
it  hape  no  pere  to  pe  forseid  ping}  wonderfully  to  be 
done,  and  pat  softely.     I  haue  proued  it  a  hundrep  tymej 
for  certayne.  32 
A  valence  of  42.  Valence  of  worm  ode  is  ]>us  made :  Recipe  iuyse  of 
wormode,  smalach,  plantayn,  and  with  swynej  grese  clensed 
wele  of  pe  skynnej  brisse  it  wele  and  long  togidre  in 
maner  as  it  is  seid  afore  of  pe  valence  of  scabiows;  pe  36 
which  y-done,  kepe  it  to  pin  vse.  \)is  valence  of  wormode 
availep  to  brissyngs  of  legge}  and  of  schynbone^,  and  to 
af  174]  wounde^  pat  ar  made  in  pe  muscle^  *of  pe  arme}  and  of  pe 
leggej  with  a  strey^t  wounde,  as  of  a  knyfe  or  of  ane  arowe,  40 
Its  uses. 


The  Gathering  and  Preparation  of  Medicines. 
99 
(1)  A  resonable  gonernance  of  lawe;  of  lywyn^. 
(2)  .JisculapiMS  helyd  menne  with  tl'ernices  &  medi- cine*. 
(3)  Aschepites  taught  to   geder  rot««  and  herbe3, 
flowrlej  and  frotej. 
(4)  Asohepii'x  scliewod   iiicsures  and  quantitiej, 
weghtcj  and  wares. 
(5)  Asohepiu*  teche<7t  to  make  puluerej  eo/ifec- cionis  <fe  elec.tuarie^. 
(0)  Ypocras  &  galien  schewe  certeyne  quajititiej  in preseruyng. 
PLATE  IV.— From  Sloane  MS.  6,  Brit.  Bins.,  leaf  170,  back. 


100  Cases  cured  l>y  Absinthe.     A  Sleeping  Powder. 
or  of  sicli  oTper.     And  it  availep  to  al  wounde}  for  to  hold 
pam  opne,  and  for  certayne  it  mitigate))  wele  pe  akyng. 
When  pe  nedep  for  to  vse  perof  in  wounde},  }ette  in  first  of 
oile  of  rose}  or  of  violet  2  droppe}  or  pre,  and  anoynt  al  4 
pe  wounde  about  of  pe  same  oile},  and  pe  me?nbre  pat  is 
hurt.     And  afterward  putte  aboue  of  pe  forseid  valence 
vpon  softe  stupe}  of  lyue,  and  bynde  it  competently,  and   , 
lat  it  so   abide   a   naturel   day.     }3is  medicyne,    forsop,  8 
represse))  wele  bolnyng  and  akyng  and  holdep  pe  wounde 
opne,  and  gendrep  quitowr,  and  drawe])  out  venym  of  pe 
wounde,  and  quenchep  pe  brynnyng  of  pe  me?nbre.     Jjis 
A.  case  cured  oyntment,  forsop,  luffed  Imych  ;  vrith  pis  medicyne  cured  12 
valence  m      la  fischer  at  london,  which  was  hurt  in  pe  lacert  of  his 
arme   of  pe  prikkyng  of  a  scharp  yren  standyng  on  pe       :        hac 
gymewej  at  be  frere  Caromea l ;  Wherfore  he  was  almost       medicina 
curavi  quen- dede,  what  of  akyng,  bolnyng,  and  brynnyng,  and  what  16  dampisten- arium  apud 
of  be  vncouenable   cure   of  a  barbowr   pat   putte   in   be       London. '  •  qui  ex  punc- 
wounde  scharpe  tenter  of  Ivnne  clobe,  and  putte  aboue       turafem 
acuti  stan- diaquilon.     His  cure,  forsop,  remoued   away,  I  putte  to       tern  super f          e          •  i  •  ^r.  legimeus 
about  euensang-tyme  of  pe  forseid  valence  with  anoyntyng  20  ad  fratres 
of   oile   of   roses,  And   bifore   cokcrow    pe   pacient   was       iac«to 
delyue?-ed  of  akyng  and  pe  arme  biganne  for  to  swage,*       iSus." and  in  the  mornyng  he  sleped  wele,  and  pe  arme  was 
purged  of  quitowr  by  the  wounde.     Bot  witte  pou  pat  I  24 
putte  no  tent,  in   pe   forseid  wounde,  hot  al-only  \viih 
^ettyng  in  of  oile  and  puttyng  aboue  of  pe  valence  with- 
out any-ping  atuix  I  cured  hym  finaly ;  wherfor  I  gatte 
and  another    mych  honow.     At  nothyngham,  forsop,  I  cured  anoper  28 
hair°ttiug"     Perntely  wt't7i  pe  forseid  medicyne,  pat  was  smyten  in  pe arme,  bot  uo^t  porow,  witft  a  knyfe ;   of   whos  life  men 
despaired  for  akyng  and  anguysch  of  pe  pacient. 
A  sleeping      43.  Pulim  for  to  make  a  man  sleep  agayn}  his  wille,  after  32 
bjMroguesIn  maner  of    Eibalde}  and  trowans  in  fraurcce,  pat   felaw- 
shypep  pam  by  pe  waie}  to  pilgn'nie^  pat  pai  may  robbe  pam of  pair  siluer  when  pai  ar  aslepe.    Ttecipe  semen  iusqwiam  w#, 
}i3annie,  i.[e.]  darnel,  papaueris  nigri,  i.[e.]  chessede,  de  36 
radice   brionie   sice.,   ana;   brek   al-togidre   in  a   brasen 
morter  into  ful  smal  poudre,  of  which  poudre  giffe  hym 
in  his  potage  or  in  a  kake  of  whete  or  in  drynk,  &  he 
*  ' '  vnbolne  "  ovcrlined. 


An  Ointment  to  prevent  pain  at  Operations. 101 
croci 
opii  31.  Con- flee  cum 
aq'iA  rosa- rum  et  pilu- las  delude 
forma. 
2  Succus 
hyoscyami. 
3  Ungafron- 
tein  pulsus, 
axillas,  volas manuuiu  et 
pi  an tag 
pedum  et i-tatim  dor- 
iniet  patiens 
11  ec  incisio- nem  sentiet 
*  Quia  cro- cus et  cassia 
lignea  sunt 
fisena  opii. 
schal  slepe  alsone,  wille  he  wil  he  nojt,  al-aday  or  more 
after  fe  quantite  fat  he  hafe  taken. 
Pillules  for  to  p?-0uoke  slepe  :    Ilecipe  amides  5j,  croci 
4  3iii,  opii  3j ;   Make  f  am  wyth  watre  of  roses  and  make 
pillule    l  and  giffe  Jam ;  And  lie  fat  take])  fam  schal 
slepe  for  certayne. 
Ane   vntement   slepyng,    wt't/t   which  if  any  man  be 
8  anoynted  he  schal  mow  suffre  kuttyng  in  any  place  of 
fe    body    wit/tout    felyng   or    akyng.      Recipe    succws 
iusqwiami,2    Mandrage,    Cicute,   lattuce,   papaueris   alb* 
&  nigri,  and  fe  sedej  of  al  pise  forseid  herbe},  if   fai 
12  may  be  hadde,  ana ;  opii  thebaic^,  opii  Micoms  ana, 
3j  or  ij ;  fresch  swynej  grese  fat  suffice]).  Breke  al 
fise  Avele  &  strongly  togidre  in  a  morter,  and  afte?'ward 
boile  }>ani  stro?igly  and  fan  cole  fam.  And  if  it  be 
16  no3t  fikke  ynoj,  putte  to  a  litel  propoleos,  i.[e.]  white 
wex,  and  kepe  it  to  fine  vse.  And  when  fou  wilt  vse 
ferof,  Anoynt  his  front,  his  pulse^,  his  temple^,  his  anne- 
hole^,  and  his  lone^  of  his  heud  and  his  fete,  and  alsone 
20  he  schal  slepe  so  fat  he  schal  fele  no  kuttyng.3  })is  is 
also  if  a  man  may  no^t  slepe  for  ofer  cause,  as  in  febre^ 
or  sich  ofer,  for  fis  oyntment  oufer  schal  giffe  hyin 
remedy,  or  fe  pacieut  schal  die.  Also  one  grayne  of  opii 
24  thebaici  to  f e  quantite  of  3ss. ,  distempered  wit/*  a  pynte 
of  wyne  a  or  more  after  f  e  mijt  of  hym  fat  schal  drynk 
it,  schaH  make  hym  fat  drynkef  it  for  to  slepe.  Also  fe 
sede  alon  of  iusqwiami  albz  giffen  in  Avyne  to  drynk  make 
28  f  e  drynker  alsone  for  to  slepe,  fat  he  schal  nojt  fele  what- 
so-eue?1  is  done  to  hym.  And  fis  proued  I  myself  for 
certayne.  And  witte  fou  fat  it  spedef  for  to  draw  hym 
fat  slepef  so  by  f  e  nose  and  by  f  e  cheke}  and  by  f  e  berde, 
32  f«t  fe  spiritej  be  quickened  fat  he  slepe  no^t  ouer  rist- 
fully.  Also  be  fe  lech  warre  fat  he  giffe  no^t  opium 
wit/iout  croce  for  to  drynk,  for  crocws  and  cassia  lignea 
bene  fe  frenej,  i.[e.]  bridelle^  of  opii.4 
36  44.  ffor  to  wake  a  man  fat  slepef  f  MS  :  Putte  to  his  nose 
gray  brede  y-tosted  &  wette  in  strong  vinegre ;    or  put 
vinegre  or  mustard  in  his  nose ;  Or  wasch  his  heued  in 
strong  vinegre ;  Or  anoynt  his  templej  with  f  e  iuse  of 
n  MS.  wynde. 
[leaf  174, 
back] 
Pills  to 
cause  sleep. 
Anointment 
to  prevent 
pain. 
Its  prepara- tion. 
How  used. 
Method  of treating  u 
patient  to bring  him round  after its  use. 
To  wake  a sleeping 
man  after 
opium. 


102  A  Chai*m  against  Spasm  and  Cramp. 
rubarb.  And  giffe  bym  som  o]>er  stemutorie^.  and  alsone 
he  schal  wake.  And  witte  fou  pat  it  is  gode  for  to  giffe 
hym  afterward  castoreum,  for  it  is  triacle  of  iusqwianms l  i  tueriaoa p  --P--UI.  t.    t        -I.    -L        •.«•        •      i.  -A      hyoscyami. &  opii  &  sich  o)>er,  wheper  it  be  gmen  in  fe  moupe  or  in  * 
drynk,  or  it  be  put  in  J?e  nose  ;   for  castore  chaufej)  & 
most  cowforte})  J)e  synewe^  colded,  and  soluej?  J>e  paralysye. 
And  also  giffe  hym  fat  confortef  pe  brayne,  as  castore, 
nuc«'s  moschatz',2  roses,  nenufare,  mirtellej  &  sumac. 
Contra  spasmum  et  crampe. 
[Sioane  MS.         Contra  spasmum  et  crampe  radix  brionie  in  aqua  cocta  et 2002,  leaf  79] 
postea  pistata  aut  per  se,  vel  in  agrippa,  vel  oleo  de  semine 
lini,  vel  in  dialthea,  vel  oleo  de  lilio  aut  camomille,  collo  12 
emplastrata  spasmum  curat  in  quocunque  membro    cor- 
l*  leaf  79,       poris  fuit.    Quia  in  collo  *est  origo  omnium  morborum.    Et 
spasmus  est  contractio  musculorum  ad  suas  origines.    Istud 
carmen  sequens  contra  spasmum  expertissimum  est  a  multis  16 
inventis  eo  utentibus,  tarn  in  partibus  transmarinis  quaiu 
in  istis.    Nam  apud  mediolanis,  i.[e.]  Melane,  in  lumbardia 
tempore  quo  dominus  Leonellus  filius  regis  Anglie  nupsit 
filiam  domini  Mediolani.    Anglici  ibidem  spasmo  vexaban-  20 
tur  propter  potaciones  vinorum  fortium  et  calorum  patrise 
et   nimium   repletiones.      TJnde  quidam  miles,  et  filius 
domini  Eeginaldi  de  Gray  de  Schirlond  juxta  Chestre- 
felde,  qui   fuit  apud  mediolanum  cum  domino   leonello  24 
et  habuit  secum  carmen  sequens,  et  quemdam  armigerum 
a  spasmo  vexatur  ita  quod  caput  suum  retro  trahebatur 
fere   usque   ad  collum    suum,   ad   modum   balistse,81  qui 
pro  dolore  et  angustia  fere  exspiravit.     Quo  viso,  dictus  28 
Miles  accepit  carmen,  in  pergamento  scriptnm  in  bursa 
t  leaf  so]  positum,  in  collo  patientis  apposuit  fdicentibus  circum- 
stantibus  orationem  dominicam  ad  dominam  Maria  [m]  et, 
ut  mihi  juravit  fideliter,  infra  quatuor  horas  aut  quinque  32 
sanitati  est  restitutus.  Et  postea  multos  alios  a  spasrno 
ibidem  liberavit,  unde  magna  fama  de  illo  carmine  in  ilia 
civitate  exercuit : 
Item  in  civitate  Lincoln  :  .  .  .  Item  apud  London  :  ...  36 
Item  apud  villam  de  Huntingdon  : 
a  "  crossbow  "  in  the  margin. 


A   Charm  against  Spasm  and  Cramp.  10S 
....  *postea    claudatur   ista    cedula   admodum   unius   ^J^f80> 
litera  ut  non  leniter  possit  aperiri,  unde  solebam  scribere 
istud  literis  grecis,  ne  a  laicis  perspicietur. 
4  Quum  ut  istud  carmen  scriptum,  se  honeste  in  dei 
omnipotentis  nomine  gesserit  et  crediderit,  sine  dubio  a 
spasmo  non  erit  aggravatus.  Istud  habeatur  in  reveren- 
tia  propter  dominum  qui  virtutem  dedit  verbis,  petris  et 
8  herbis,  et  secrete  fingitur  ne  omnes  nostant  carmen  ne 
forte  virtutes  datas  a  deo  amittat. 
A  charm  against  Spasm  and  Cramp. 
Bryony   root  boiled    in  water  &  afterwards   crushed 
12  either  by  itself  or  in  agrippa  or  in  linseed  oil  or  in 
dialthea  or  in  oil  of  lily  or  camomile  cures  spasm  when 
it  is  plastered  upon  the  neck  in  whatever  part  of  the 
body  it  may  be.  Because  the  source  of  all  diseases  is  in  whence 
16  the  neck  :    And  spasm  is  a  contraction  of  the  muscles  at  spasms, 
their  origin.     The  following  charm  against  spasm  has  been 
found  most  sovran  by  many  who  have  used  it  both,  at 
home  and  abroad.      For  amongst  the  Mediolani  [i.e.]  the  Results  of 
20  Milanese,  in  Lombardy  at  the  time  when  the  Lord  Lionel,  feTtlvHtafat 
son  of  the  king  of  England,  married  the  daughter  of  the  WhennDuke 
lord  of    Milan,  the    English  there  were  troubled  with  Bedded, 
spasm  due  to  their  potations  of  the  strong  &  hot  wines  of 
24  the  country  &  to  too  many  carouses.  Whereupon  a  certain 
knight,  the  son  of  Lord  Reginald  de  Grey  de  Schirlond 
near  Chesterfield,  who  was  at  Milan  with  the  Lord 
Lionel  &  had  with  him  the  following  charm,  &  saw  a 
28  certain  gentleman  so  troubled  with  the  spasm  that  his 
head  was  drawn  backward  nearly  to  his  neck  just  like  a 
crossbow,  &  he  was  almost  dead  from  the  pain  and  The  charm, how  used. 
starvation.      And   when   the   said   knight   saw   this   he 
32  brought  the  charm  written  on  parchment  &  placed  it  in 
a  purse  &  put  it  upon  the  neck  of  the  patient  whilst  those 
who  stood  by  said  the  Lord's  prayer  and  one  to  our  lady 
Mary,  and,  as  he  swore  faithfully  to  me,  within  four  hours 
36  or   five  he  was  restored  to  health.     And  afterwards  he 
freed   many  there   from  spasm,  &   the   great  report   of 
that  charm  spread  throughout  that  state.     Again  in  the 


104  A  Chamn  against  Spasm  and  Cramp. 
city  of  Lincoln  .  .  .  again  in  London  .  .  .  again  in  the 
Town  of  Huntingdon. 
th«  charm  °'       ^n   nomine   patris  >J<  et  filii  >J<  et  Spiritus  sancti  ^< Amen.  4 
[J]  Thebal  [£J  Enthe  [j]  Enthanay  [£]  In  nomine  Patris 
[J]  et  Filii  [JJ  et  Spiritus  sancti  [£j  Amen.  [t]  Ihesu 
JN"azarenus  [f]  Maria  ££J  lohannes  [J]  Michael  [J]  Gabriel [f]  Eaphael  [J]  Verbum  caro  factum  est  [J].  g 
Let  it  be  closed  afterwards  in  the  manner  of  a  letter 
so  that  it  cannot  be  opened  easily,  &  for  this  reason 
why  written  I  used  to  write  it  in  greek  letters  that  it  might  not  be 
letters.  understanded  of  the  people.  And  if  any  one  carries  that  12 
charm  written  fairly  in  the  name  of  God  almighty,  & 
believes,  without  doubt  he  will  not  be  troubled  with 
cramp.  Let  it  be  held  in  respect  on  account  of  the  Lord 
who  gave  virtue  to  words,  to  stones  &  to  herbs,  &  let  it  16 
be  made  secretly  that  every  one  should  not  know  the 
charm  lest  perchance  it  should  lose  the  virtues  given  by 
God. 


105 
APPENDIX 
[MS.  Rawlinson,  B.  102,  leaf  30,  back.] 
Grant  to  R.  de  Rupella  of  land  in  the  Cantred  of 
Tirmany,  Connaught,  given  to  him  by  the  Black 
Prince. 
Sciant  presentes  et  futuri  quod  ego  lohannes  de  Arderne  dedi 
concessi  et  hac  present!  carta  confirmaui  Domino  Richardo  de  Rupella 
pro  homagio  et  servicio  suo  totam  terram  meam  cum  omnibus  pertin- 
entijs  suis  sine  aliquo  retenemento  quam  habui  in  illo  Theodo  quod 
vocatur  Crohun  in  Cantredo  de  Tirmany  in  Connatia  de  dono  et 
feoffamento  domini  Edwardi  illustris  Regis  Anglise  primogeniti  in 
escambium  manerij  sui  de  Willinghale  et  Plesingho  cum  pertinentijs 
suis  liabendam  et  tenendam  de  me  et  heredibus  meis  eidem  domino 
Richardo  et  heredibus  suis  et  eorum  assignatis  adeo  libere  et  quiete 
sicut  idem  dominus  Richardus  tenet  terram  suarn  de  Clonedach'  quam 
habet  de  dono  et  feoffamento  predicti  domini  Edwardi  et  sicut  plenius 
et  liberius  et  mtegrius  continetur  in  Carta  quam  idem  dominus 
Ed\vardus  de  dicta  terra  mihi  confecit  reddendo  inde  per  Annum 
mihi  et  heredibus  meis  ipse  dominus  Ricardus  et  heredes  sui  et  eorum 
Assiguati  vnum  denarium  ad  Pascha  et  faciendo  pro  me  et  here- 
dibus meis  predicto  domino  Edwardo  et  heredibus  suis  servicium  feodi 
vnius  militis  pro  omnibus  servicijs  consuetudinibus  sectis  exactioni- 
bus  et  omnibus  demandis  secularibus.  Et  ego  lohannes  et  heredes  mei 
warrantizabimus  acquietabinius  et  defendemus  eidem  domino  Richardo 
et  heredibus  suis  et  eorum  Assignatis  totam  predictam  terram  cum 
omnibus  pertinentiis  suis  sine  aliquo  retenemento  per  predictum 
servicium  sicut  predictum  est  contra  omnes  homines  et  feminas  inper- 
petuum.  Et  vt  hec  rnea  donatio  firma  et  stabilis  permaneat  huic  Carto 
Sigillum  meum  apposui.  Hijs  testibus,  Dominis  lohanne  de  Ripar', 
Roberto  de  Vfforde,  Ricardo  de  Tany,  Willelmo  de  Wokingdon, 
Rogero  de  Bello  Campo,  Richardo  de  Ispanya,  Militibus,  Waltero  de 
Essex,  Thoma  locelyn,  lohanne  de  Rupell',  et  Alijs. 
[This  is  entered  in  the  Bodleian  Catalogue  at  Oxford  under  the  heading 
"  Arderne  lohannes,  chirurgus."  Cf.  Forewords,  p-  x.] 




107 
NOTES. 
l/i.  Ploge  seems  to  be  a  variant  of  the  more  common  form  plage  and 
is  equivalent  to  '  Plague,'  but  it  is  not  given  in  this  form  in  the  New English  Dictionary. 
1/4.  An  account  of  John  Arderne  is  given  in  the  Forewords.  He  calls 
himself  Johannes  Arderne  Sirurgicus  in  1372  and  Magister  Joh.  de  Arderne 
after  1376.  I  have  adopted  the  simpler  form. 
1/4.  The  first  pestilence  was  the  Black  Death,  which  entered  England  at 
Weymouth  about  the  middle  of  August  1348,  and  ravaged  the  kingdom  in 
1349.  It  was  pandemic,  and  yet,  in  spite  of  the  tremendous  mortality 
which  attended  its  progress,  it  does  not  seem  to  have  attracted  much 
attention  from  the  medical  men  who  lived  through  it.  Arderne  only  uses 
it  in  this  passage  as  a  means  of  determining  the  time  when  he  began  to 
practise  in  Nottinghamshire,  yet  he  must  have  seen  it  in  its  full  fury. 
Details  of  the  Black  Death  will  be  found  in  Creighton's  "  History  of 
Epidemics  in  England,"  vol.  i,  and  in  Father  Gasquet's  "The  Great 
Pestilence  now  commonly  known  as  the  Black  Death."  The  second  pesti- lence, called  the  Great  Plague,  occurred  in  1361,  and  killed  amongst  others 
Henry,  Earl  of  Derby  and  Duke  of  Lancaster  (cf.  l/io).  The  third 
pestilence  in  1369  killed  his  daughter  Blanche,  wife  of  John  of  Gaunt. 
1/8.  Sir  Adam  Everyngham.  The  Everynghams  had  long  been  estab- lished at  Tuxford.  An  Adam  de  Everyngham  went  bail  for  several 
deerstealers,  36  Hen.  Ill  (1251),  and  Thoroton,  in  the  "Antiquities  of 
Nottinghamshire ''  (ed.  1677,  p.  380,  col.  2),  states  that  John  de  Lexington died  41  Hen.  Ill  (1256),  seized  of  the  manor  of  Tuxford  and  hamlet  of 
Warsop,  and  of  the  land  in  Lexington  held  of  Adam  de  Everynt«ham.  The 
Records  of  the  Borough  of  Nottingham  (1155-1399,  vol.  i,  p.  389)  note  on 
April  27th,  1330,  a  grant  from  Richard,  son  of  Richard  de  Lameleye  dwelling 
in  Lampadidnawe  in  Wales   to  William  de  Mekisburg  of  Notting- 
ham of  a  messuage  in  Gedeling  and  all  the  land  formerly-  held  of  Sir  Adam de  Everyngham  in  Gedelin,  Carleton  and  Stoke  Bardolf.  The  Sir  Adam 
de  Everyngham  treated  by  John  Arderne  died  8th  Feb.,  2  Ric.  II  (1378-9), and  he  was  probably  operated  upon  not  later  than  1358.  This  treatise 
on  the  fistula  was  written  in  1376  (see  Forewords,  p.  xi),  so  that  this 
passage  must  have  been  a  later  addition  to  the  original  manuscript.  The 
armorial  bearings  of  the  Everyngham  family  are  Argent,  a  fess  azure,  a 
label  of  three  points  gules.  Thoroton  (ed.  1797,  vol.  3,  p.  207)  gives  a 
pedigree  of  the  family  of  Everyngham. 
l/io.  Sir  Henry,  that  tyme  named  Erie  of  Derby.  He  was  Henry 
Plantagenet  (1299  V-1361),  son  of  Henry,  Earl  of  Lancaster,  and  his Countess  Maud.  Sir  Henry  was  cousin  to  Edward  III  who  created  him 
Earl  of  Derby  in  1337,  Earl  of  Lincoln  in  1349,  and  Duke  of  Lancaster  in 
1351,  being  the  second  person  in  England  to  be  made  a  Duke.  Sir  Henry 
was  one  of  the  original  Knights  of  the  Garter,  and  was  looked  upon  through- out Europe  as  the  very  mirror  of  chivalry,  when  chivalry  was  at  its  height. 


108  Notes.     Page  1,  line  13  to  page  2,  line  1. 
Readers  of  Froissart  will  recall  many  of  his  exploits  often  in  company  with 
that  other  great  Captain,  Sir  Walter  de  Manny.  Sir  Henry  sailed  for 
Antwerp  with  King  Edward  III  in  July  1338,  and  in  1339,  after  the  great 
sea  fight  at  Sluys,  he  was  left  in  prison  in  Flanders  as  security  for  the 
King's  debts.  It  may  have  been  at  this  time  that  Arderne  was  practising at  Antwerp,  if  there  is  any  truth  in  the  tradition  (see  Forewords,  p.  xii). 
In  1343  Sir  Henry,  then  Earl  of  Derby,  was  sent  to  Avignon  to  Pope 
Clement  VI  and  Alfonzo  XI  of  Castile.  Whilst  in  Spain  he  and  his  fellow 
ambassador,  the  Earl  of  Salisbury,  did  good  service  against  the  Moors  at 
the  siege  of  Algebras  when  cannon  are  said  to  have  been  used  for  the  first 
time.  Arderne  treated  a  Spanish  nobleman  at  Algeciras  (Forewords, 
}-.  xi). 
1/13.  The  irregular  endings  of  the  technical  terms  which  is  noticeable 
here  and  in  other  parts  of  the  MS.  (cf.  24/5)  is  due  to  the  scribe  copying 
them  as  they  stand  in  the  Latin  text  where  the  case  varies  with  the construction  of  the  sentence  in  which  it  occurs. 
1/14.  Arderne's  knowledge  of  the  Gascony  campaign  is  curiously minute  and  makes  it  possible  that  he  had  actually  taken  part  in  it  or  that 
he  knew  the  country  intimately.  Writing  more  than  thirty  years  after  the 
event  he  gives  the  towns  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  visited  by  one  of 
the  three  divisions  into  which  the  Duke  of  Lancaster,  formerly  the  Earl  of 
Derby,  had  divided  his  forces,  rather  than  in  the  correct  geographical 
order.  The  army  landed  at  Bordeaux  and  captured  Bergerac  on  24th 
August,  1345.  The  town  was  granted  to  Lancaster  as  a  reward  for  his 
services  but  reverted  to  the  crown  upon  his  death.  It  came  afterwards 
into  the  hands  of  Edward  "  the  Black  Prince,"  and  was  given  by  him  to 
John  of  Gaunt  in  1370.  The  arms  of  the  town  "Deux  pattes  de  griffon 
sur  un  champ  d'or"  may  still  be  seen  emblazoned  in  the  Great  Crowcher 
Book  of  the  Duchy  of  Lancaster,  says  Mr.  Armitage-Smith  in  his  "  John  of 
Gaunt "  (p.  199). 
Toulouse.  Sir  Adam  doubtless  reached  here  with  the  force  acting  on 
the  Lot  and  Garonne  rivers  after  the  battle  of  Auberoche  on  24th  October, 
1345,  when  300  lances  and  600  archers  defeated  a  force  estimated  at  10,000 
strong  under  the- Count  of  Lille-Jourdain. 
Narbonne  had  some  special  association  for  John  Arderne,  since  he 
named  one  of  his  best-beloved  ointments  Ungt.  Noirbon,  adding  as  a  pun 
that  though  it  was  black  (Noir)  it  was  good  (bon). 
Poitiers  was  stormed  on  4th  October,  1346,  with  a  tremendous  slaughter 
of  men,  women  and  children.  So  much  rich  booty  was  taken  that  raiment 
was  held  of  no  account  unless  it  was  cloth  of  gold  or  silver,  or  plumes. 
The  campaign  ended  here,  and  the  Duke  of  Lancaster  returned  to  London 
13th  June,  1347. 
1/23.  Mene  is  here  used  in  the  sense  of  "  an  instrument  or  agency,"  and 
is  equivalent  to  "  deo  favente."  It  is  as  favourite  a  phrase  with  Arderne 
as  "I  dressed  him,  God  cured  him,"  used  to  be  with  Ambroise  Pare. 
1/29.  Balne  by  Snaith.  Balne  is  5J  miles  from  Snaith,  a  small  town  in 
the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  There  was  a  priory  at  Snaith  belonging  to 
the  Warwick  family. 
2/i.  John  ScJiefeld  of  Bri^twell  a-side  Tekyll.  This  John  was  probably a  member  of  the  knightly  family  of  Sheffield  of  Nottingham.  The  manor 
of  Tickhill  was  granted  to  John  of  Gaunt  in  1372  with  other  rewards  for 
surrendering  the  Earldom  and  Honour  of  Richmond,  which  was  im- 


Notes.     Page  2,  line  2  to  page  "2,  line  29.  109 
mediately  bestowed  upon  John  de  Montford  to  secure  his  allegiance  then 
wavering  between  England  and  France. 
2/2.  Sir  Reginald  Grey  rle  Wilton,  also  known  as  Grey  de  Shirlond  or 
De  Grey.  He  was  the  fourth  Lord  de  Grey  and  was  aged  30  in  1342.  He 
died  in  1370,  and  held  the  manor  of  Shirland,  co.  Derby.  His  grandfather 
John,  Lord  de  Grey,  was  Justice  of  North  Wales  and  Vice-Justice  of 
Chester  1296-97.  Sir  Reginald  Grey's  son,  the  fifth  Lord  de  Grey,  served in  Gascony  in  1366.  The  peerage  became  extinct  in  1614  when  the 
fifteenth  Lord  de  Grey  died  in  the  Tower  after  having  been  found  guilty  of 
high  treason  in  connection  with  the  Bye  or  Priest's  Plot.  The  Calendar of  Close  Eolls  (Ed.  Ill,  1354-1360,  No.  1358)  gives  the  names  of  Sir  Reynold de  Grey  and  John  Arderne  as  witnesses  to  an  enrolment  of  release  by 
Roger  de  Puttenham,  knight  of  the  manor  of  Wylye,  co.  Warwick. 
2/5.  Sir  Henry  Blakborne.  A  Sir  Henry  de  Blakeburn,  son  of  William, 
son  of  Paulinus  de  Eleston  of  the  County  of  Lancaster,  obtained  "  a 
general  pardon  for  his  good  service  in  the  war  of  France  ...  on  con- 
dition that  he  did  not  withdraw  from  the  King's  service  so  long  as  he  shall 
stay  this  time  on  this  side  the  sea  without  his  special  licence."  The  pardon is  granted  by  K  and  the  testimony  of  Adam  de  Swynburn,  under-constable 
of  the  Army.  It  is  dated  "  By  Calais,  September  4th,  1346."  There  also exists  a  ratification  of  the  estate  of  a  Henry  de  Blakeburn  as  prebendary  of 
Preston,  in  the  church  of  St.  Mary,  Salisbury.  It  bears  the  date  September 
22nd,  1351.  On  May  7th,  1379,  "  Henry  de  Blakeburn  was  presented  to the  church  of  Reddcleve-on-Sour  by  John  de  Wynewyk,  and  has  since 
resigned  it."  ("  Gal.  of  Patent  Rolls,"  Ed.  Ill,  viii,  496  ;  ix,  137  ;  and Rich.  II  (1377-1381),  p.  363.) 
2/io.  The  transcriber  has  left  out  a  line  here.  The  text  runs,  "After- 
ward I  halid  Sir  lohn  Masty  parsone  of  Stopporte  in  Chestre-shire." 
2/i  i.  Gunnas  or  Gunnays  was  a  York  family  in  the  fourteenth  century. 
Thomas  Gunnays  was  a  scrivener  in  1363-4 ;  John  Gunnays  a  Tannator 
in  1389-90,  and  there  was  also  John,  a  Marchaunt.  ("Register  of  York 
Freemen,"  The  Surtees  Soc.,  vol.  i,  1896.) 
2/13.  The  scribe  has  made  a  mistake  in  the  name.  John  le  Colier  was 
Mayor  of  Northampton  in  1326-7,  and  again  in  1339-40.  He  seems  to 
have  been  a  most  regular  attendant  at  the  meetings  of  the  Town  Council, 
because  his  name  appears  as  a  witness  to  thirty-three  documents  between 
the  years  1315  and  1340.  ("Records  of  the  Borough  of  Nottingham," vol.  i,  1155-1399.)  A  William  Colyar  was  Mayor  of  Northampton  1368-9. 
2/29.  Towel.  Arderne's  translator  uses  somewhat  unusual  terms  for  the parts  with  which  he  is  dealing.  The  towel  is  always  the  Anus.  It  is,  I 
suppose,  a  form  of  "  tewel,"  a  pipe  or  funnell,  and  the  word  has  survived  in 
the  North  of  England  as  a  "  tuyer"  in  connection  with  the  blast  furnaces. Longanon  or  Longaon  is  the  ordinary  medieval  word  for  the  rectum  or 
lowest  segment  of  the  large  intestine.  The  Lure  is  sometimes  the  ischio- 
rectal  fossa,  and  sometimes  the  anus  or  rectum.  The  "  Promptorium  Parvu- 
lorum"  gives  "Mouth  of  a  hotel,"  "Lura,"  or  Leather  bagge,  adds  the Bibliotheca  Eliotae,  ed.  1559.  The  New  English  Dictionary,  s.v.  Lure, 
2  Her(aldic),  says,  "A  conventional  representation  of  a  hawk's  'lure,'  con- 
sisting of  two  birds'  wings  with  the  points  directed  downwards  and  joined 
above  by  a  ring  attached  to  a  cord."  Either  of  these  similes  suits  the anatomy  of  the  ischio-rectal  fossa,  but  it  is  clearly  the  simpler  one  that  was 
in  Arderne's  mind,  as  he  did  not  know  enough  anatomy  to  visualise  the 
iechio-rectal  fossa  in  accordance  with  the  hawk's  lure.  Cf.  ll/io. 


110  Notes.     Page  2,  line  40  to  page  4,  line  2. 
2/40.  The  opinions  of  Arderne's  immediate  contemporaries  and  pre- decessors on  the  subject  of  Fistula  in  ano  are  given  in  the  Forewords 
(p.  xvi). 3/8.  The  translation  quite  misses  the  beauty  of  this  passage,  which 
should  read,  "  It  is  not  opened  to  them  that  knock  as  they  pass  by,  but  to 
those  who  stand  and  knock." 
8/13.  In  diuanudiis.  These  words  have  proved  a  crux  from  the  earliest 
times.  Some  scribes  have  merely  copied  the  words  here  printed,  others 
have  omitted  them  entirely.  John  Arderne  clearly  wrote  a  very  bad  hand, 
but  Miss  E.  M.  Thompson  has  made  the  following  transcription  of  Sloane 
MS.  No.  29301  (leaf  22,  back,  col.  80),  which  was  presumedly  a  fair 
copy  produced  under  Arderne's  immediate  supervision — "Nota  de  honore dei.  Ad  honorem  ergo  dei  omnipotentis  qui  aperuit  mihi  sensum  ut 
thesaurum  in  agro  studenter  absconditum  quod  longo  tempore  pectore- 
que  anelo  diligencius  ac  pertinacius  diu  auidius  insuadaverim  invenire 
prout  mea  suppetat  facultas  absque  scernatis  facunditate  posteris,  domino 
mediante  istoque  libello,  explicite  duxi  exarandus.  Non  ut  meipsum  laude 
dignum  ex  tanto  munere  ceteris  efferam  sed,  ut  ne  dominum  irretem 
et  pro  dragma  quam  mihi  tradidit  affatu  urgeor  delatoris."  The  badly 
written  words  "diu  avidius"  in  this  passage  were  soon  corrupted  into 
"  in  diuanudiis,"  the  "  in  "  being  an  interpolation.  "  In  diuanudiis  "  easily 
became  "  De  Dinamidiis,"  the  name  of  a  spurious  work  ascribed  to  Galen, and  thus  Arderne  acquired  an  undeserved  reputation  as  a  Grecian. 
3/23.  The  transcriber  has  omitted  the  line,  "  bat  is  leful  forsoj?  to  sey 
that  is  knowen  &  for  to  witness  that  is  seerie." 
3/27.  This  was  the  Black  Prince's  campaign  in  1355.  It  lasted  eight weeks,  and  was  of  a  freebooting  character. 
3/34.  Yet  John  Arderne  thought  it  wise  to  obtain  the  Minorite's  secret. 
"  II  ne  re>ele  son  secret  (en  1370)  que  parce  qu'il  est  vieux  et  qu'il  a  tire 
des  tres-beaux  benefices,"  says  Daremberg  (Hist.  des.  Sci.  mdd.  i,  301,  note). 
3/36.  It  is  unnecessary  to  show  the  debt  of  the  medical  profession  in 
the  middle  ages  to  Galen,  who  was  born  at  Pergamos  about  A.D.  131. 
Arderne  probably  quotes  Galen  through  a  Latin  translation  of  an  Arabic 
version.  He  knows  him  as  the  author  of  the  Megatechni  or  De  methodo 
medendi — eepairevriKrjs  fjLf66Sov — and  of  the  Microtechni,  or  simply  the  Techni 
or  Tegni  which  was  the  ars  medica  or  -rtxy-n  larpiK^.  The  Pantechni  or 
Pantegni  used  here  by  Arderne  was  not  one  of  Galen's  writings.  It  was written  in  Arabic  by  Isaac  the  Jew  (d.  932  A.D.),  and  was  translated  into 
Latin  by  Constantinus  Africanus  (fl.  1036  A.D.),  who  issued  it  as  his  own. 
Cf.  55/3.  Prof.  Ed.  Nicaise  ("  La  Grande  Chirurgie  de  Guy  de  Chauliac," Paris,  1890,  p.  52)  says  that  in  1309  the  Faculty  of  Medicine  at  Montpellier demanded  that  each  bachelor  who  wished  to  become  a  Master  must  have 
studied  the  following  books  of  Galen,  "  De  eomplexionibus;  de  malicia complexionis  diverse  ;  De  simplici  medicina;  De  crisi  et  criticis  diebus  ; 
De  Ingenio  sanitatis."  He  had  also  to  explain  two  books  which  had  been lectured  upon  and  one  which  had  not  been  commented  upon,  of  the  Techni 
and  Prognostics,  or  of  the  Aphorisms  of  Hippocrates,  or  of  his  Regimen, 
or  the  Isagoge  of  Johannitius,  the  Febres  of  Isaac,  or  the  Antidotary  of 
Ilhazes.  See  Dr.  Payne  on  Medical  Books  in  use  at  Montpellier,  Rnslidall's 
"  Universities  of  Europe,"  Vol.  2,  part  ii,  page  780.  The  fact  that  Arderne knew  and  quotes  all  these  writers  lends  some  support  to  the  theory  that  he 
was  educated  at  Montpellier. 
4/2.  These  passages  on  the  Manner  or  Behaviour  of  a  Leech  form  the 
true  joy  of  those  who  travail  amongst  the  old  Masters  of  Medicine  and 


Notes.     Page  4,  line  24  to  page  7,  line  29.  Ill 
surgery.  They  are  full  of  conceits,  and  give  a  picture  of  contemporary 
manners  and  customs  which  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  in  any  other  way. 
The  parallel  passages  from  Salicet,  Mondeville  and  Lanfrank  are  given  in 
the  Forewords  (xix-xxvi),  and  show  that  there  was  a  comu.on  source  for 
these  paragraphs  on  medical  ethics  of  which  the  chief  was  "  De  adventu 
medici "  of  Archimattheus,  a  master  at  Salerno. 
4/24.  The  expression  "  for  why  "  is  employed  by  the  translator  as  the 
English  equivalent  for  the  Latin  word  "Nam."  It  does  not  imply  a 
question  therefore,  but  is  used  as  we  should  now  say  "  because." 
5/8.  The  greeting  of  ladies  by  thrusting  the  hands  into  their  bosom 
had  a  long  vogue  in  England,  and  it  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether 
the  fashion  of  wearing  low-necked  dresses  was  a  cause  or  an  effect  of  the custom.  By  the  end  of  the  seventeenth  century  it  was  only  used  by  near 
relatives,  and  Mr.  Samuel  Pepys  records  that  he  availed  himself  of  the 
privilege. 
6/4.  Speaking  of  the  cure  of  scabies  by  the  inunction  of  a  mercurial 
ointment  (MS.  Ashmol.  1434,  leaf  131  ;  cf.  79/i),  Arderne  says,  "I  have tried  it  many  times  and  have  made  a  good  deal  of  money  from  it,  and  I 
got  twenty  shillings  for  a  single  application.  And  take  notice  that  the 
inunction  must  be  repeated  for  forty  days,  or  for  a  month  at  least. 
("Quod  centies  probavi  et  exinde  multa  lucra  adquisivi  pro  certo  et haec  xxs.  pro  uno  liserio.  Et  nota  quod  tale  lisorium  per  xl  dies  vel 
mensem  ad  minus  debet  portari.") 
6/4.  The  fees  charged  by  Arderne  are  very  large,  if  it  be  remembered 
that  money  had  at  least  seventeen  times  and  perhaps  twenty  times  its  present 
value.  I  have  given  some  account  of  the  fees  of  our  ancestors  in  Janus 
(May-June  1909,  pp.  287-293),  and  to  the  facts  there  contained  I  may  add an  observation  obtained  by  Prof.  Ed.  Nicaise  for  his  edition  of  Guy  de 
Chauliac's  Surgery  (op.  cit.  p.  Ixii).  "A  lady  was  attended  in  1348  by three  doctors,  two  Jews  and  a  Christian,  and  she  paid  a  fee  of  half  a  floriu 
to  each.  The  livre  tournois  at  this  time  was  equivalent  to  one  florin  and 
16  sols  of  pontifical  money — the  cash  then  current  at  Avignon — and corresponded  to  27  francs  34  centimes  of  modern  French  money.  The 
general  practitioner  therefore  received  8  francs  17  centimes  for  each  visit, 
which  is  equivalent  to  three  visits  for  a  guinea." 
6/5.  The  custom  of  paying  for  an  operation  by  an  annuity  as  well  as 
by  a  fee  lingered  in  England  until  late  in  the  seventeenth  century,  for 
Richard  Wiseman  (1622?-1676),  speaking  of  a  patient,  says,  "This  person retired  into  the  country  afterwards  and  returned  to  London  at  the  end  of 
two  years,  and  acknowledged  to  me  his  cure  by  settling  thirty  pounds 
a  year  upon  me  during  his  life  and  paid  me  sixty  pounds  for  the  two  years 
passed."  Readers  of  French  history,  too,  will  recollect  that  Louis  XIV paid  Dr.  Fran9ois  Felix  the  sum  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  pounds  and 
settled  a  farm  upon  him  in  1686  for  curing  him  of  a  fistula. 
7/29.  "The  Senator  Boetius,"  says  Gibbon,  "is  the  last  of  the  Romans 
whom  Cato  or  Tully  could  have  acknowledged  for  their  countryman." 
("Roman  Empire,"  ed.  1862,  v,  27.)  He  was  born  at  Rome  about  475  A.D. an  I  was  consul  in  510.  He  was  a  minister  of  Theodoric,  King  of  the 
Ostrogoths,  who  displaced  the  Emperor  Odoacer.  Boethius  was  afterwards 
imprisoned  at  Pavia  and  was  put  to  death  in  525  A.D.  He  was  subsequently 
canonised  as  St.  Severinus.  He  wrote  the  "  De  consolatione  Philosophise" 
(Chaucer's  translation  of  which  was  published  in  the  Early  English  Text 
Soc.'s  Extra  Series,  No.  V,  1868),  as  well  as  some  valuable  treatises  on 


112  Notes.     Page  7,  line  39  to  page  11,  line  6. 
Music  and  Geometry.     The  "de  disciplina  scholarium  "  mentioned  in  the text  is  falsely  ascribed  to  Boetius.     It  is  quoted  again  28/27. 
7/39.  Arderne  repeatedly  draws  attention  to  the  effect  of  the  mind  on 
the  body,  and  makes  it  appear  that  what  we  now  call  neurasthenia  was 
not  unknown  in  his  experience.  Cf.  6/23,  8/3,  60/i6,  64/32. 
8/27.  The  operation  of  fistula  recommended  by  Arderne  is  described  in 
the  Forewords  (p.  xvii)  to  this  volume.  Arderne  purposely  gives  fancy 
names  to  the  instruments  and  to  the  remedies  he  uses  as  part  of  a  fixed 
design  to  keep  his  methods  secret.  This  secrecy  was  a  common  feature  of 
the  medical  profession  until  quite  recently — indeed  it  still  lingers  in  parts 
where  medical  men  dispense  "  our  ointment"  or  "our  linctus."  Arderne especially  feared  the  competition  of  other  leeches,  cf.  15/9  an(^  30/3,  °^  the 
Barbers,  cf.  71/i6,  and  of  the  laity,  cf.  103/3,  ^or  w"en  he  used  the  charm 
against  tic,  tetanus  and  delirium  tremens,  he  not  only  disguised  the  words 
in  Greek  characters  but  he  made  nonsense  of  them,  "ne  a  laicis  perspicietur." 
8/29.  The  sequere  me  was  a  flexible  probe,  and  was  named  appropriately 
enough  because  it  was  the  guide  to  be  followed. 
9/4.  The  acus  rostrata,  or  "snowted  needle,"  was  a  grooved  director along  which  the  scalpel  was  passed.  The  snowted  or  curved  end  fitted into  a  hole  in  the  cochlearia  or  shield  which  was  introduced  later  in  the 
operation  to  protect  the  opposite  side  of  the  rectum  at  the  moment  the fistula  was  divided.  This  snouted  needle  was  made  of  silver. 
9/12.  The  tendiculum,  or  dilator,  made  of  boxwood,  was  used  chiefly 
to  keep  the  ligature  taut  whilst  the  fistula  was  being  divided.  For  this 
purpose  it  was  provided  with  a  hole  into  which  fitted  (9/i6)  the  wrayste 
or  "vertile,"  much  in  the  same  way  that  the  peg  fits  into  a  violin.  The ends  of  the  ligature  were  passed  round  the  wrayste,  which  was  then  twisted 
until  the  frsenum  caesaris  was  tight  enough. 
9/2O.  The  frcenum  Ccesaris,  or  ligature,  constricted  the  rectal  side  of 
the  fistula.  It  seems  to  be  merely  a  vestigium  of  an  obsolete  operation  for 
the  cure  of  fistula.  Albucasis  used  it  as  an  e'crasewr,  and  Arderne  had sufficient  reverence  for  authority  not  to  discard  it.  But  the  operation  he 
describes  is  one  of  simple  division.  The  tendiculum,  the  wrayste  and  the 
fraenum  Caesaris,  therefore,  are  useless  because  as  soon  as  the  division 
was  complete,  they  all  fell  out  of  the  wound.  Cf.  24/26.  They  steadied  the 
parts  whilst  the  incision  was  made,  but  they  complicated  the  operation  by 
giving  the  surgeon  two  instruments  to  hold  in  his  left  hand  (the  acus 
rostrata  and  the  tendiculum)  whilst  he  held  the  scalpel  in  his  right  hand. 
The  cochlearia  must  always  have  been  held  by  the  assistant — the  fellow  of 
the  leech — as  Arderne  calls  him, — the  surgeon's  mate — as  the  Elizabethans knew  him. 
9/24.  The  siringa  is  probably  only  a  clyster-pipe.  Two  forms  are 
given,  the  one  with  side-openings,  as  was  then  used,  the  other  an  improved form  recommended  by  Arderne  as  the  result  of  his  own  experience 
(cf.  74/38)  in  which  there  is  only  a  single  terminal  orifice. 
ll/l.  Aposteme  is  an  early  form  of  the  word  which  afterwards  became 
Imposthume.  It  means  a  suppurating  inflammation  or  an  abscess. 
11/6.  Arderne's  pathology  of  fistula  is  excellent  and  is  clearly  the result  of  observation.  He  has  seen  and  treated  cases  of  ischio-rectal 
abscess,  and  has  observed  how  such  abscesses  have  become  chronic  and ended  in  a  fistula. 


Notes.     Page  11,  line  18  to  page  12,  line  21.          113 
Il/l8.  The  axillary  glands  were  the  emunctories  of  the  heart:  the 
inguinal  glands  of  the  liver  :  the  cervical  glands  of  the  brain. 
ll/iQ.  CJwiicellej  is  quite  an  unusual  word,  and  except  for  the  Latin 
version  it  would  be  incomprehensible.  The  Latin  gives  the  English  gloss 
"  fauces."  It  seems,  therefore,  to  be  a  form  derived  from  the  same  source 
as  "  Chawylbone  "  which  the  Promptorium  Parvulorum  renders  Mandibula. 
11/ao.  Gilbertyn  is  Gilbert  the  Englishman,  known  to  all  readers  of 
Chaucer  because  he  is  named  in  the  Prologue  (1.  429)  with  Bernard  and 
Gatesden.  Gilbertus  Anglicus  flourished  about  1210,  and  is  said  to  be  the 
first  practical  English  writer  on  medicine  though  Master  Richard  preceded 
him.  Dr.  Payne  in  his  Fitzpatrick  lectures  in  1904  says  that  Theodoric 
took  his  description  of  leprosy  from  Gilbertyn,  a  description  evidently  at 
first  hand  and  in  man}'  respects  very  accurate.  Gilbert  wrote  a  compen- 
dium or  Laurea  of  medicine,  printed  at  Lyons  1510  (cf.  55/io),  and  a  Com- 
mentary upon  the  verses  of  Gilles  de  Corbeil  "  De  Urinis  "  (cf.  69/32).  A commentary  in  English  upon  these  same  verses  and  attributed  to  John 
Arderne  exists  in  manuscript  in  the  Hunterian  Library  at  Glasgow  (No.  328). 
11/21.  01.  roset.  Oil  of  roses  entered  largely  into  the  mediaeval 
pharmacopoeia  as  a  soothing  application.  The  ceruse  here  ordered  to  be 
mingled  with  it  is  carbonate  of  lead,  and  the  litharge  is  protoxide  of  lead. 
The  lotion  thus  had  the  soothing  and  astringent  properties  which  is  still attributed  to  lead  lotion  or  Goulard  extract. 
11/24.  Wombe.  Arderne  speaks  consistently  of  the  belly  as  the  womb 
both  in  men  and  women ;  when  he  speaks  specifically  of  the  womb  in 
women  he  employs  the  term  Marice.  Cf.  pp.  80/39,  85/4  and  86/26. 
11/27.  Arderne,  like  his  contemporaries,  recognises  two  forms  of 
Mallow.  The  Althaea  rosea — which  he  calls  "tame"  mallow  (cf.  12/15), because  it  was  grown  in  the  garden,  and  Malva  silvestris — the  wild mallow. 
11/32.  A  Nastar  of  tree.  Arderne  fortunately  gives  the  English 
equivalent  for  Nastar  in  the  manuscript  No.  112  (T.  5, 14),  fol.  77,  contained 
in  the  Hunterian  Library,  Glasgow,  and  says,  "  Nastare  species  est  clysteris 
sive  enematis  '  a  glister  pipe.'  "  A  Nastar  of  tree,  therefore,  is  a  wooden enema  nozzle.  The  wood  may  be  either  boxwood,  hazel  or  willow.  His 
description  of  the  bladder  and  its  method  of  preparation  is  given  later  on ; 
cf.  75/1  et  seqq. 
12/1.  After  auctores.  The  author  is  probably  Serapion  the  younger 
who  wrote  a  large  work  on  pharmacology,  which  was  translated  from 
Arabic  into  Latin  under  the  title  "Liber  de  medicamentis  simplicibus"  or 
"  De  temperamentis  simplicium."  He  lived  about  the  end  of  the  eleventh century.  For  Serapion  the  elder  see  55/2g,  p.  124. 
12/9.  Diaquilon.  Three  forms  of  diachylon  plaster  were  used.  One 
called  Khazes'  plaster  ;  a  second  Mesue's,  and  the  third  diachylon  commune. 
Arderne  here  recommends  Mesue's  diachylon  which  contained  mucilage  of Althaea  and  oil  of  camomile  amongst  many  other  ingredients. 
12/15.  M.  The  symbol  M.  is  used  for  Manipulus  in  dispensing  drugs — 
a  handful — and  the  handful  was  either  large  or  small.  The  small  handful or  pinch  was  denoted  by  the  letter  P.  for  Pugillus,  and  it  was  usually 
estimated  at  about  the  eighth  part  of  the  Manipulus. 
12/21.  Lana  succida  is  sufficiently  described  in  the  text.  It  seems  to 
have  been  a  crude  method  of  obtaining  what  is  now  called  lanolin.  An 
undressed  fleece  is  still  used  in  folk-medicine. 
ABDEKXE.  I 


114  Notes.     Page  12,  line  21  to  page  15,  line  8. 
12/21.  The  persistence  of  these  simple  remedies  is  shown  by  Miss  Edith 
Durham's  interesting  account  of  Higher  Albania  (Lond.  1909,  p.  93).  She says,  speaking  of  a  comminuted  fracture  of  the  leg  treated  by  an  old 
Franciscan  at  Vukli : — "  He  then  plugged  and  dressed  the  wound  with  a 
salve  of  his  own  making — the  ingredients  are  extract  of  pine  resin,  the green  bark  of  elder  twigs,  white  beeswax  and  olive  oil.  The  pine  resin 
would  provide  a  strong  antiseptic.  The  property  of  the  elder  bark  I  do  not 
know.  ...  In  gunshot  wounds  he  was  very  expert.  For  'first  aid'  his prescription  was  :  Take  the  white  of  an  egg  and  a  lot  of  salt,  pour  on  to 
the  wound  as  soon  as  possible  and  bandage.  This  only  temporary  till  the 
patient  could  be  properly  treated  with  rakia  (the  local  alcoholic  drink)  and 
pine  salve  as  above.  The  wound  was  to  be  plugged  with  sheep's  wool, cleaned  and  soaked  in  the  salve.  The  dressing  to  be  changed  at  night  and 
morning  and  at  midday  also  if  the  weather  be  very  hot.  Should  the 
wound  show  signs  of  becoming  foul,  wash  again  with  rakia  as  often  as 
necessary.  This  treatment  he  had  inherited  from  his  grandfather  who  had 
it  from  his.  The  exact  proportions  and  way  of  making  salve  he  begged  to 
be  excused  from  telling  me  as  they  were  a  family  secret."  Every  word  of this  passage  would  have  been  approved  by  Arderne.  He  would  have 
recognised  his  Unguentum  sambuci  (cf.  30/21 ),  the  egg  medled  (cf.  28/4) 
with  salt  would  have  been  nothing  new  to  him,  the  cleaning  of  the  sheep's wool  he  might  have  considered  an  improvement  upon  his  own  lana  succida 
(cf.  12/2o),  as  he  had  an  open  mind  (cf.  86/4),  and  he  would  have  endorsed 
thoroughly  the  old  priest's  disinclination  to  give  away  the  secret  of  a preparation  (cf.  15/8). 
12/40.   Wormed,  \.  e.  warmed. 
13/2O.  Ragadiei  was  the  name  given  to  fissures  formed  round  the 
anus  and  vulva.  It  is  used  here  to  denote  chronic  ulceration.  Frousingei 
seems  to  be  a  mere  repetition  of  ragadie^,  as  it  does  not  occur  in  the  Latin texts. 
13/24.  An  ulcus  undesiccable  is  an  ulcer  which  continues  to  form  pus 
in  spite  of  treatment.  Mediaeval  surgeons  were  very  skilful  in  frightening themselves  with  names. 
14/4.  There  were  two  Geoffrey  Scropes  living  in  the  latter  half  of  the 
fourteenth  century,  (i)  Sir  Geoffrey  Scrope,  knighted  before  Paris,  1360. 
He  was  the  eldest  son  of  Sir  Henry  le  Scrope  of  Masham,  Co.  York,  the 
first  Lord  Scrope,  who  was  Governor  of  Guisnes  and  Calais  in  1360.  This 
Geoffrey  Scrope  was  slain  at  Piskre,  Lithuania,  in  1362  (cf.  67/34).  (ii)  Sir 
Geoffrey  le  Scrope,  son  of  Stephen,  second  Lord  Scrope,  who  was  living 
in  1409,  but  had  died  sine  prole  before  1418.  The  brother  of  this  Geoffrey 
le  Scrope  was  Stephen  le  Scrope,  Archdeacon  of  Richmond  in  Yorkshire, 
who  died  September  5,  1418. 
14/2O.  It  is  clear  from  this  and  the  following  lines  that  Arderne  had 
seen  and  noted  cases  of  uraemia  following  upon  long-continued  urethral 
fistulaa.  The  headache,  giddiness,  dull  pain  in  the  loins  and  vomiting 
which  occur  during  the  later  stages  of  renal  disease  are  all  duly  noted. 
14/38.  Bernard  de  Gordon  was  teaching  at  Montpellier  in  1285,  and  was 
living  in  1318.  He  wrote  the  "Lilium  medicinse,"  but  Arderne  here  shows that  he  was  absolutely  ignorant  of  Anatomy. 
15/8.  This  is  another  good  instance  of  the  secrecy  which  characterised 
the  practice  of  surgery  at  this  period.  It  was  still  a  trade  to  be  taught,  and 
it  was  many  years  before  it  became  a  profession  to  be  learned.  (Cf.  8/25  and 71/15.) 


Notes.     Page  16,  line  4  to  page  24>,  line  21.  115 
16/4.  It  would  have  been  impossible  for  Arderue  to  have  escaped  the 
belief  in  Astrology  which  was  a  feature  of  his  time.  He  gives  the  usual 
table,  common  to  all  his  contemporaries,  for  finding  the  house  of  the  moon 
on  any  given  day,  and  he  thought  that  the  planets  had  an  influence  upon 
the  twelve  parts  of  the  body  which  correspond  to  the  signs  of  the  zodiac. 
16/7.  Ptholomeus  was  Ptolemy  the  physician,  who  lived  at  Alexandria 
in  the  third  century  B.C.,  and  was  perhaps  identical  with  Ptolemy  the 
Geographer.  De  Mondeville  quotes  Ptolemy  the  physician  and  refers  to 
his  "Centilegium  ";  Guy  de  Chauliac  also  speaks  of  his  "Centiloquium." Pictagoras  was  Pythagoras  the  Greek  philosopher,  born  about  582  B.C. 
He  was  steeped  in  the  mystical  lore  of  Egypt  and  India ;  a  vegetarian 
and  a  social  reformer,  his  name  is  chiefly  associated  with  the  doctrine  of 
Metempsychosis. 
Basis  is  Abvi  Beer  Mohammed  Ibn  Zacariya  Ar-Razi,  commonly  known as  Rhazes.  He  was  born  in  850  A.D.  and  died  about  932.  He  was  the 
first  great  Arabian  physician,  and  his  text-book  called  the  "  Continent  "  was only  displaced  by  the  work  of  Haly  Abbas.  Rhazes  is  still  interesting  to 
us  because  he  first  distinguished  clearly  between  Smallpox  and  Measles. 
16/8.  Haly  is  Haly  the  Arabian  physician  who  died  in  994  A.D.  He 
wrote  the  "  Royal  Book"  which  displaced  Rhazes' text-book,  and  was  in turn  displaced  by  the  Canon  of  Avicenna.  Cf.  56/7,  P-  124. 
21/2.  Arderne's  account  of  fistulate  or  festred  gout  makes  its  probable that  he  is  describing  the  condition  which  is  now  known  as  chronic  inflam- 
mation of  the  bone  due  to  infective  micro-organisms.  Sophocles  described 
Philoctetes  as  suffering  from  a  similar  condition.  Cf.  46/25. 
21/9-  Ypocras,  i.  e.  Hippocrates,  lived  during  the  golden  age  in  Greece 
(460-377  B.C.),  and  was  contemporary  with  Socrates.  His  writings  were 
known  through  Galen's  commentaries  upon  the  Prognostics,  Aphorisms, and  on  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  which  had  been  translated  into  Latin 
before  the  fourteenth  century. 
21/27.  The  meaning  of  this  passage  may  be  thus  rendered,  "  Take  heed lest  thou  art  so  blinded  by  the  desire  for  money  as  to  operate  upon  a  case 
thou  knowest  to  be  incurable." 
22/12.  Lusting  is  here  equivalent  to  grudging. 
22/17.  The  details  of  the  operation  are  admirably  given,  and  it  is  quite 
possible  to  follow  each  step,  a  very  rare  thing  in  the  case  of  mediaeval 
writers  on  surgery,  but  Arderne  was  a  master  of  this  part  of  his  subject. 
Cf.  Forewords,  p.  xvii. 
22/22.  The  rig  bone  is  the  vertebral  column.     Cf.  34/34,  62/8,  70/24. 
23/1.  Arderne  shows  his  ability  by  recommending  a  cutting  operation. 
It  proves  that  he  was  not  afraid  of  the  bleeding  which  daunted  his  contem- 
poraries and  many  of  his  successors.  Cf.  24/32. 
23/21.  Both  John  Arderne  and  Henri  de  Mondeville  were  never  tired 
of  repeating  that  surgery  was  an  art  to  be  learnt  by  practice.  It  was  too 
much  the  custom  of  the  time  to  rely  upon  authority  and  to  think  that 
everything  could  be  learnt  from  books. 
23/27.  Boece.    Cf.  7/29. 
24/5-  Freno  cesaris;  24/g.  frenum  cesaris.     Cf.  1/13,  p.  108. 
24/21.  Arderne  gives  a  choice  of  two  cutting  instruments,  a  razor  and  a 
lancet.  Dr.  Stewart  Milne  ("Surgical  Instruments  in  Greek  and  Roman 
Times,"  Oxford,  1907,  p.  31)  describes  a  form  of  razor  in  which  "a  scalpel 


116         Notes.     Page  24,  line  29  to  page  27,  line  28. 
blade  is  mounted  on  a  ring  and  the  fore-finger  is  passed  through  the  ring." 
Such  a  razor  would  have  suited  Arderne's  purpose  admirably,  but  he  used 
some  form  of  scalpel.  "Lanceola,"  says  Dr.  Freind  ("The  History  of 
Physic,"  part  2,  p.  177),  "  in  its  proper  genuine  signification  is  no  older  than Julius  Capitolinus,  how  long  it  has  been  applied  to  signify  a  surgical  instru- 
ment I  cannot  tell ;  however,  it  may  be  traced  as  high  at  least  as  the  time 
of  William  of  Bretagne,  who  lived  in  1220  and  wrote  the  history  of  Philip 
August,  whose  chaplain  he  was."  He  gives  some  account  of  the  lanceola, and  distinguishes  it  very  plainly  from  the  Phlebotomus,  both  which  instru- 
ments we  see  were  made  use  of  in  that  age.  "  Lanceola  dicitur  subtile ferrum  acututn,  cum  quo  minutores  aliqui  pungendo  venam  aperiunt  in 
minutione.  Aliqui  cum  Phlebotomo  venam  percutiunt."  (Lanceola  is  a name  given  to  a  delicate  pointed  instrument  with  which  some  bleeders 
open  a  vein  by  puncturing  it  in  bleeding.  Others  breathe  a  vein  with  a 
phlebotome.)  (Cf.  61/23.) 
24/29.  Arderne  here  shows  that  he  knows  the  last  thing  a  surgeon 
learns — the  knowledge  when  to  stop  in  operating. 
24/32.  Surgeons  had  no  satisfactory  instruments  for  stopping  bleeding 
until  pressure  forceps  were  invented  by  Sir  Spencer  Wells  about  1884. 
Many  devices  were  tried  and  had  their  day,  but  hasmorrhage  remained  the 
bugbear  of  every  operating  surgeon,  and  the  fear  of  its  occurrence  limited 
the  scope  of  his  work.  Arderne  here  recommends  the  excellent,  simple  and 
cleanly  method  of  sponge  pressure  to  arrest  the  immediate  hsemorrhage, 
and  afterwards  uses  a  styptic  powder.  Arderne  gained  a  great  reputation 
for  his  prescriptions  (cf.  Forewords  p.  xxxi),  and  it  is  evident  that  he  was 
a  good  physician  as  well  as  a  practical  surgeon ;  cf.  pp.  97  and  98.  The 
styptics  here  recommended  were  all  in  common  use.  Soli  is  Bolus 
armeniacus,  a  yellow  earth  containing  oxide  of  iron.  Sangnis  draconis 
was  the  resin  obtained  from  the  fruit  of  the  Calamus  draco.  Aloes  epaticus : 
the  mediaeval  materia  medica  recognised  socotrin  aloes  and  hepatic  aloes 
which  was  an  inferior  quality. 
25/9.  Walwort  is  either  the  Sambucus  or  the  Pellitory.  Arderne 
probably  means  the  Elder,  of  which  it  was  said  "this  tree  has  not  one 
part  but  is  used  in  Pharmacy."  The  juice  is  still  used  in  the  form  of  Elder wine. 
26/n.  Directions  for  making  sanguis  veneris  and  oil  of  camomile  are 
given  on  pp.  89  and  94. 
26/13.  -^  nastar  of  tree,  a  wooden  clyster-pipe ;  cf.  11/32,  p.  113. 
26/21.  The  preparation  of  Pulv.  sine  pari  is  given  on  p.  86. 
27/6.  The  preparation  of  Salus  populi  is  given  on  p.  90.  It  is  charac- 
teristic of  the  time  that  fancy  names  are  purposely  given  to  all  these 
preparations  lest  their  composition  should  become  known  to  the  barbers  or to  other  leeches. 
27/25.  Bolnyng  is  equivalent  to  swelling  or  swollen. 
27/28.  Alum  jucarin.  combust,  is  described  on  p.  81.  Three  kinds  of 
alum  were  recognised  :  alum  glass,  alum  plume,  and  alum  zuccarin.  Alum 
glass  was  the  crude  alum  crystals  ;  alum  plume  was  the  natural  aluminium 
sulphate  ;  alum  zuccarin.  was  the  re-crystallised  form  ;  but  alum  zuccarin. 
was  also  used  as  a  synonym  for  sugar  candy.  The  crude  alum  was  some- 
times called  Alumen  roche  from  the  town  of  Roche  in  Syria,  and  as  this was  often  written  Alumen  Eo  it  came  to  be  called  Alum  of  Rome. 


Notes.     Page  27,  line  30  to  page  32,  line  7.  117 
27/3O.  Sarcocolla  is  the  resin  of  the  Penaea  sarcocolla  and  mucronata. 
It  was  thought  to  make  the  flesh  adhere  together,  hence  its  name. 
27/31.  Psidie  is  pomegranate  bark. 
27/32.  Terra  sigillata,  or  Lemnos  earth,  was  imported  from  Egypt  in 
large  pastiles  stamped  with  the  Sultan's  seal,  hence  its  name.  It  had astringent  properties. 
27/38.  Ceruse  is  carbonate  of  lead.  Lithargyrum  or  Litharge  is  the 
protoxide  of  lead  which  forms  as  a  pellicle  on  the  surface  of  melted  lead  ; 
lithargyrate  of  silver  and  gold  are  formed  similarly  when  these  metals  are melted. 
28/IO.  Arderne  clearly  indicates  the  calling  of  an  apothecary  as  distinct 
from  the  barbers,  surgeons  and  physicians  of  the  time.  As  a  surgeon  ho 
gathered  his  own  simples  and  made  his  own  preparations,  rather  to  keep 
their  composition  a  secret  than  because  he  was  obliged  to  do  so,  for  the 
apothecaries  would  have  made  them  up  for  him  equally  well. 
30/21.  "  Smalach"  says  Dr.  E.  C.  A.  Prior  ("  On  the  Popular  Names  of 
British  Plants,"  Lond.  1879,  p.  217),  "or  Smallage,  is  a  former  name  of  the celery,  meaning  the  small  ache  or  parsley  compared  with  the  great  parsley, 
olus  atruni.  Ach,  Fr.  ache,  is  derived  from  the  Latin  apium  by  the  change 
of  pi  to  ch,  as  in  sapiam  to  seiche." 
Won/node  is  wormwood,  the  Artemisia  absinthium.  The  word  is  cor- 
rupted from  A.S.  and  O.E.  we.rm.od.  Wormwood  was  used  in  the  Middle 
Ages  to  keep  off  mod  or  made,  a  maggot ;  the  first  syllable,  derived  from 
A.S.  weriaii,  to  keep  off,  has  become  by  similarity  of  sound  worm. 
30/22.  Molayne  is  the  Verbascum  Thapsus,  or  Tapsibarbatus  ebulus, 
the  hig  (hag)  taper,  or  Bullock's  lungwort. 
Walwort  is  the  dwarf  elder,  the  Sambucus  ebulus,  sometimes  called 
Danesblood  or  Banewort. 
Sparge  or  Spurge  is  the  Cataputia  minor  ;  Weybread  is  the  plantain — 
Plantago  major  ;  Mugwort  is  the  Artemisia  vulgaris.  It  is  said  to  have 
obtained  its  popular  name  from  its  use  against  mowjhte,  mough  or  moghe, 
a  moth  or  maggot.  Auance  is  Avens  or  Herb  Benett,  i.e.  Benedicts,  the 
Geum  urbanum.  "  Where  the  root  is  in  the  house  the  devil  can  do 
nothing  and  flies  from  it ;  wherefore  it  is  blessed  above  all  herbs,"  says Platearius,  whose  book  Arderne  had  read.  Cf.  79/10. 
30/23.  Petite  Consoude  was  the  consolida  minima  or  the  daisy — Bellis 
perennis.  The  name  Consoude  was  given  to  several  different  plants  in  the 
Middle  Ages,  e.g.  the  Comfrey,  the  Bugle  and  the  Wild  Larkspur.  "And for  healing  of  wounds,  so  soveraigne  it  is,  that  if  it  bee  put  into  the  pot  and 
sodden  with  pieces  of  flesh,  it  will  souder  and  rejoine  them,  whereupon  the 
Greekes  imposed  upon  it  the  name  of  Symphytum-Consound,"  says  Pliny 
in  Philemon  Holland's  translation  (Bk.  27,  ch.  vi,  p.  275). Wodbynd  is  the  Woodbine  or  Lonicera  Periclymenum. 
31/21.  Diaflosmus  is  the  plaster  used  as  a  local  application,  whilst 
tapsimd  is  the  confection  for  internal  use.  Tapsimel  here  mentioned,  and 
for  the  first  time,  had  an  extraordinary  popularity  and  was  officinal  as  late 
as  1773.  Cf.  Forewords,  p.  xxx. 
32  7.  The  deadly  nightshade  is  called  in  German  Nachtschatten,  and  it 
is  possible  that  Arderne  may  have  learnt  the  Flemish  word  for  it,  if  he  was 
at  Antwerp,  as  is  reported  traditionally.  Cf.  Forewords,  p.  xii. 


118  Notes.     Page  33,  line  13  to  page,  39,  line  8. 
33/13.  Arderne  gives  a  formula  for  his  unguenturn  ruptoriuin  (Sloane 
MS.  29301,  leaf  35,  col.  1),  which  is  substantially  the  same  as  the  one 
mentioned  here.  It  consists  of  unslaked  lime  well  mingled  with  black 
soap  and  made  into  a  mass,  which  was  afterwards  bound  with  diachylon 
upon  the  part  to  be  destroyed.  Jamerius  (cf.  55/3,  Rubrica  xxi)  also 
gives  a  formula  for  a  ruptory,  "  De  unguento  quod  ruptorium  dicitur. Unguentum  forte  quod  ruptorium  dicitur.  Tfy.  Saponis  saracenici  pondus 
x  denariorum  ;  calcis  vive  pondus  viii,  capitelli  fortissimi  pondus  v  de- 
nariorum.  Confice  sic  :  calx  prius  cribellata  cum  sapone  diu  conficiatur, 
deinde  addatur  capitellum,  et  cum  predictis  commisceatur."  There  were 
two  kinds  of  lime  ointment.  The  older  form  was  made  by  "  taking  of lime  that  hath  been  washed  at  least  seven  times  Ib.ss.  Wax  giii ;  Oil  of 
Eoses  Ib.i.  Let  them  all  be  briskly  worked  together  in  a  leaden  mortar, 
after  the  wax  hath  been  by  a  slow  fire  melted  in  a  sufficient  quantity 
of  the  same  oil."  (Alleyne,  op.  cit.,  p.  330,  col.  i,  No.  11.)  The  other ointment  was  the  more  active.  Ifc.  Quicklime  gvj  ;  Auripigment  Siss.  ; 
roots  of  Florentine  Orris  §i ;  yellow  Sulphur;  Nitre  ana  5iss. ;  a  strong 
lixivium  of  Bean  Stalks  Ib.  ii. ;  Mix  and  boil  all,  in  a  new  pot  glazed,  to  a 
just  thickness,  which  you  may  know  by  anointing  a  feathered  quill  there- 
with, if  the  feathers  easily  fall  off;  then  add  Oyl  of  Spike  gss. ;  and  make 
an  ointment  or  liniment."  (Salmon's  "  New  London  Dispensary,''  1678, p.  768,  col.  2.)  Soap  was  of  two  kinds  :  White  soft  soap  known  as  French 
soap,  and  hard  grey  soap  called  Saracenic  soap.  The  latter  is  meant  when 
the  prescription  demands  black  soap. 
34/4.  Arderne  anchored  his  tents  in  much  the  same  way  as  we  now 
anchor  drainage  tubes  in  deep  wounds  by  putting  a  thread  through  one 
end.  He  uses  the  word  "ground"  systematically  for  "bottom,"  so  that 
where  we  should  say  the  bottom  of  the  wound  he  says  (34/6)  "in  the 
grounde  of  the  fistula." 
35/15.  Reparaled  means  the  same  as  re-dressing  a  wound,  that  is  to 
say,  changing  the  dressings. 
86/15.  Arderne  loved  to  play  upon  words.  Cf.  37/12  and  91/32.  He 
could  not  resist  the  pun  with  "  bubo,"  which  is  the  technical  term  for  an abscess  in  the  axilla  or  groin,  and  also  means  an  owl.  Guy  makes  the 
same  joke  (ed.  Nicaise,  p.  166).  Buboes  were  the  characteristic  mark  of 
the  bubonic  plague,  and  he  must  have  seen  many  examples.  In  the 
later  epidemics  the  Searchers  recognised  the  disease  by  the  botch  which 
is  a  plague  token. 
37/6  et  seqq.  Arderne  gives  a  most  creditable  account  of  cancer  of  the 
rectum,  and  distinguishes  it  clearly  from  dysentery. 
37/29.  Those  who  know  how  many  cases  of  cancer  of  the  rectum  are 
still  overlooked  and  are  treated  as  cases  of  chronic  constipation,  will  trow 
with  Arderne  that  there  are  still  many  "wele  unkunyng  leeches"  abroad. 
38/1 1  et  seqq.  The  treatment  and  the  picture  of  the  later  stages  of 
cancer  of  the  rectum  are  excellent,  and  are  evidently  drawn  from  repeated 
personal  experience. 
38/4O.  Arderne  very  properly  insists  on  a  digital  examination  in  cases of  chronic  nlceration  of  the  rectum.  Such  an  examination  is  still  too  often 
omitted.  Both  time  and  knowledge  are  then  lost,  to  the  great  detriment of  the  patient. 
39/8.  Bio  is  throughout  the  scribe's  method  of  spelling  blue  ;  "  bloness" {cf.  52/27),  therefore,  is  the  same  as  bluish. 


Notes.     Page  39,  line  27  to  page  44,  line  38.          119 
39/27.  Arderne  again  warns  against  the  dishonest  habit  of  operating 
merely  for  the  sake  of  the  fee  when  no  commensurate  advantage  is  gained 
by  the  patient. 
39/4O.  Aysel  is  an  early  form  for  eissel — vinegar. 
40/1.  Virgo,  pastoris  was  used  by  the  old  writers  on  materia  inedica  for 
several  varieties  of  Dipsacus,  and  more  especially  for  D.  pilosus,  silvestris and  fullonum.  It  is  the  Teasel. 
40/21.  There  were  several  varieties  of  white  ointment.  The  form 
attributed  to  Rhazes  contains  oil  of  roses  5ix  ;  Ceruse  carefully  washed 
in  rose-water  and  powdered  5iii  ',  white  wax  §ii.  Avicenna's  ointment contained  litharge  as  an  ingredient,  with  the  white  of  eggs  beaten  into  it. 
40/27.  Attrament  is  here  a  synonym  for  Vitriol  (cf.  79/i).  "  Of 
atramente^,  i.e.  of  vitriolej."  It  also  means  Ink  (cf.  67/28). 
40/33-  Celidone  is  the  Chelidonium  majus,  the  juice  of  which  was  greatly 
esteemed  as  a  collyrium,  "because,"  says  Gerarde  (p.  911),  "some  hold opinion  that  with  this  herbe  the  dams  restore  sight  to  their  young  ones, 
when  their  eyes  be  put  out."  Dr.  Prior  (op.  cit.  p.  40)  says  that  this notion,  quoted  by  Gerarde  from  Doiioens  and  copied  by  him  from  Pliny, 
who  had  it  from  Aristotle,  was  received  and  repeated  by  every  botanical 
writer,  and  is  embodied  in  the  Regimen  Sanitatis  Salerni  — 
"  Csecatis  pullis  ac  lumine  mater  hirundo 
Plinius  ut  scribit,  quatnvis  sunt  eruta  reddit." 
which  was  Englished — 
"  Young  Swallowes  that  are  blind,  and  lacke  their  sight, The  Damme  (by  Celendine)  doth  give  them  light, 
Therefore  (by  Plinie)  wee  may  boldly  say, 
Celendine  for  the  sight  is  good  alway." 
41/i.  Few  sawage  is  erysipelas.     Cf.  91/9,  p.  133. 
41/8.  The  second  pestilence  was  the  epidemic  of  1361.     Cf.  1/4. 
41/33.  ^e  blody  fik  is  explained  in  the  treatise  on  haemorrhoids  to be  a  bleeding  pile.  Cf.  56/21. 
42/38.  I  cannot  identify  the  powder  creoferoboron  or  (43/2)  the  emplastre 
san^-uiboetos,  nor  does  Arderne  give  the  formulae  for  their  preparation. 
43/40.  Unguentum  viride-  The  green  ointment  in.  the  later  pharmacy 
(1733)  consisted  of  Verdigris;  Un^.  ^Egyptiacum ;  Oirit.  of  Elder; 
Colophony  and  Oil  of  Spike.  The  Ung.  ^Kgyptiacurn  was  ascribed  to 
Mestie,  and  in  its  simplest  form  was  compounded  with  verdigris,  honey 
and  the  sharpest  vinegar. 
44/38.  Women  held  a  well-recognised  position  as  practitioners  of 
medicine  in  the  Middle  Ages,  and  several  of  the  matron*  or  mulieres Sulernitanse  attained  renown  at  the  School  of  Salernum.  The  best  known 
is  Trotula  de  Ruggiero,  who  wrote  "  de  mulierum  passionibus."  But 
Arderne  seems  to  allude  here  to  the  "ladies  bountiful"  of  his  time,  for whom  he  had  no  great  regard.  Guy  de  Chauliac  puts  them  last  of  his  five 
sects  of  medical  practitioners.  The  first  contained  Roger,  Roland  and  the 
Four  Masters  who  treated  wounds  with  poultices  ;  the  second,  like  Bruno 
and  Theodoric,  used  dressings  of  wine  and  dried  up  the  wounds  ;  the 
third  included  William  Salicet  and  Lanfrank,  who  occupied,  he  says,  a 
position  intermediate  between  the  other  two  sects.  The  fourth  class 
embraced  those  who  had  been  trained  on  the  battlefield,  and  for  whom 


120          Notes.     Page  45,  line  1  to  page  48,  line  38. 
Arderne  had  a  sneaking  regard  ;  they  treated  their  wounds  with  charms, 
oil  and  wool,  and  said  that  God  has  given  virtue  to  words,  herbs  and 
stones  (cf.  104/15);  whilst  the  fifth  class  consisted  "of  women  and  many 
idiots  who  refer  all  their  sicknesses  to  the  Saints." 
45/1.  Drink  of  Antioch.  Harl.  2378  MS.  [B],  p.  25,  gives  a  receipt  for 
"The  Drink  of  Auntioch. — Take  1  handful  of  daysye  and  1  handful  of  bugle 
and  1  handful  of  red  coole  and  1  handful  of  strebery-wyses  [stalks]  and  1 handful  of  fenule  and  half  an  handful  of  hempe  and  as  mych  of  auence,  as 
myche  of  tansey,  as  mych  of  herbe  Robert  [cf.  54/iy],  as  mych  of  mader,  as 
mych  of  comfiry,  iiii  branche  of  orpyne,  vi  croppes  of  brere,  vi  croppes  of 
red  netle,  and  thyse  herbes  ben  sothen  in  1  galoun  of  whyt  wyn  lu-to  a 
potell,  and  afterward  put  thereto  as  mych  of  liony  clarifyed  and  after  the 
mydlyrig  set  it  ouer  the  fyr  and  thanne  sterne  it  a  litil,  and  this  drynk  schal 
ben  vsed  in  this  manere :  }if  to  hym  that  is  wounded  or  brysed  by  \>e  morwen 
of  this  drynk  iii  sponful  and  vi  sponful  of  water  and  loke  that  the  seke  be 
wel  kept  fro  gotouse  [gouty]  metes  and  drynkys,  and  from  wymmen,  and 
loke  also  that  the  maladye  be  heled  with  brere-leues  or  with  leues  of  the  rede 
coole."  ("Medical  Works  of  the  XIV  cent,"  by  Rev.  Prof.  G.  Henslowe, 1899,  p.  77.)  There  was  also  an  antidote  of  Antiochus.  It  was  an  ancient 
preparation  composed  of  germander,  agaric,  colocynth,  Arabian  stsechas, 
opoponax,  sagapenum,  parsley,  aristolochia,  white  pepper,  cinnamon, 
lavender,  myrrh  and  honey.  It  was  used  in  melancholy,  hydrophobia  and 
epilepsy.  This  was  known  as  Antiochi  hiera.  There  was  also  a  theriacum 
of  Antiochus  which  was  also  an  antidote  to  every  kind  of  poison.  It 
contained  thyme,  opoponax,  millet,  trefoil,  fennel,  aniseed,  nigella  sativa and  other  herbs. 
45/31.  A  porret  is  a  young  leek  or  onion — a  scallion — says  the  New English  Dictionary. 
46/25.  Arderne  gives  in  these  pnssages  a  tolerably  clear  account  of  the 
condition  known  to  us  as  tuberculous  dactylitis,  and  to  our  immediate 
predecessors  as  spina  ventosa.  Cf.  21/2. 
47/25.  Arderne  is  perfectly  honest  in  his  statements,  and  does  not  claim 
this  patient  as  a  cure. 
47/28.  The  bu$t  of  the  knee  is  the  bow  or  bend  of  the  knee. 
48/2.  The  pede  lyon  is  the  Leontopetalum,  Brumaria,  Lion's  leaf. It  was  considered  to  be  good  against  the  bites  of  serpents;  the  root  applied 
helps  the  Sciatica  and  cleanses  old  filthy  ulcers. 
48/i8.  A  spature.  The  Spathomele  or  spatula  probe  is  the  commonest 
of  the  classical  surgical  instruments.  It  consists  of  a  long  shaft  with  an 
olivary  point  at  one  end  and  a  spatula  at  the  other.  The  olive  end  was 
used  for  stirring  medicaments  and  the  spatula  for  spreading  them,  when 
it  was  employed  in  pharmacy.  But  it  was  so  handy  that  it  was  often  used 
as  a  blunt  dissector,  as  Arderne  did  in  this  case.  It  was  also  used  by 
painters  for  preparing  and  mixing  their  colours.  See  Dr.  Milne,  "  Surgical 
Instruments  in  Greek  and  Roman  Times,"  p.  58. 
48/32.  Ventose.  The  cupping  instruments  were  either  of  horn,  copper, 
or  glass,  and  they  were  used  either  with  or  without  scarifications — wet  or 
dry  cupping. 
48/38.  This  appears  to  be  Arderne's  sole  piece  of  correct  anatomical knowledge,  except  the  information  he  had  gained  as  to  the  position  of  the 
superficial  veins  of  the  arms  and  legs.  Cf.  49/12. 


Notes.     Page  49,  line  14  to  page  54,  line  17.          121 
49/14.  The  treatise  on  Fistuhe  ends  abruptly  with  the  words  "flesshe, 
etc."  The  manuscript  continues  on  the  opposite  page  in  a  different  hand, and  with  an  account  of  isolated  cases,  inflammation  in  the  arm  and  leg, 
witli  Arderne's  treatment. 
49  38.  The  first  case  seems  to  be  one  of  thrombosis.  The  vena  epatica 
is  the  vena  hepatica  of  the  arm  and  not  of  the  liver.  The  vein  arises  on 
the  back  of  the  hand  near  its  ulnar  edge,  taking  origin  from  the  plexus  on 
the  back  of  the  hand  and  fingers.  It  ascends  to  the  ulnar  side  of  the  fore- arm, where  it  is  called  the  anterior  cubital  vein.  It  was  known  to  medieval 
anatomists  as  the  Salvatella  (cf.  61/22),  that  on  the  right  side  being  the 
salvatella  hepatica,  and  the  vein  on  the  left  arm  the  salvatella  splenetics. 
In  like  manner  the  external  saphenous  vein  was  known  as  the  salvatella 
pedis  aut  saphena.  William  of  Salicet  (Ed.  Pifteau,  p.  459)  describes 
them  carefully,  saying,  "  Saluatella,  hepatica  in  manu  dextra,  et  splenetica in  manu  sinistra,  quae  est  inter  digitum  annularem  et  auricularem.  .  .  . 
Salutella  pedis  aut  saphena." 
50/1.  Dove's  dung  remained  in  use  until  after  1733.  Alleyne,  in  his 
"New  English  Dispensatory,"  p.  146,  col.  2,  says:  "The  dung  is  sometimes ordered  in  cataplasms  to  be  applied  to  the  soles  of  the  feet  in  malignant 
fevers  and  deliriums  with  an  intent  to  draw  the  humours  downwards  ; 
which  may  not  be  ill-guessed." 
50/7.  Arderne  gives  an  account  of  his  early  experience  of  arsenic  as 
a  dressing  on  page  83. 
50/24.  Auripigment  is  orpiment,  or  native  yellow  arsenic. 
52/8.  The  word  garse,  to  scarify,  seems  to  have  an  interesting  history 
if,  as  the  New  English  Dictionary  suggests,  it  is  derived  through  the  Latin 
from  the  Greek  xaP°-ffffftv,  to  cut  or  incise,  and  has  given  origin  to  the 
English  garsh  or  gash. 
52/14.  Epithimation  was  identical  with  the  modern  fomentation  of 
wounds  and  inflamed  parts.  Guy  de  Chauliac  in  his  seventh  treatise, 
Doct.  i,  chap,  iv  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  605) :  says,  "  Embrocations  and  Epithems are  simple  or  compound  solutions  with  which  the  limbs  are  bathed  and 
fomented.  Sponges  or  linen  being  wrung  out  of  them  are  applied  to 
the  part,  and  are  frequently  changed." 
52/15.  Solsequium  is  the  chicory  or  endive  ;  marigold  being  Calendula officinalis. 
52/26.  A  felon  was  originally  any  small  abscess  or  boil,  but  in  later 
times  the  term  was  restricted  more  especially  to  a  whitlow.  The  gloss 
anthrace  written  in  a  contemporary  hand  seems. to  imply  that  Arderne  was 
using  the  word  in  its  earlier  sense  and  to  signify  a  carbuncle. 
52/28.  The  canon  seems  to  have  suffered  from  an  attack  of  gouty 
eczema,  which  ended  in  thrombosis  and  the  formation  of  a  callous  ulcer 
of  the  leg. 
53/15.  A  mormale  was  an  inflamed  sore,  especially  on  the  leg.  Readers 
of  Chaucer  will  remember  of  the  Cook  in  the  Prologue,  line  386,  "  But great  harm  was  it  as  it  thought  me  That  on  his  schynne  a  mormal  hadde 
he."  Arderne  adopted  the  treatment  still  used  for  callous  ulcers :  he applied  firm  pressure,  cleansed  it,  and  afterwards  applied  a  stimulating ointment. 
54/17.  Herb  Robert  is  the  Geranium  Robertianum.  It  is  said  to  have 
been  called  after  Robert,  Duke  of  Normandy,  to  whom  the  "  Regimen 
Sanitatis  Salerni "  was  inscribed ;  but  it  may  refer  to  Kneclit  Rupreclit,  a 


122  Notes.     Page  54,  line  37  to  page  55,  line  3. 
German  forest  spirit.   It  was  thought  to  be  cleansing  and  binding,  stopping 
blood  and  helping  ulcers. 
54/37.  The  vena  basilica.     Cf.  49/38,  p.  121. 
55/1.  The  sopheiia  vein.    Cf.  49/38,  p.  121. 
55/3.  The  introduction  to  the  "Treatise  on  Piles  "is  much  shortened in  this  translation.  The  Latin  text  runs  thus,  and  1  am  indebted  to  Miss 
E.  M.  Thompson  for  the  transcription — 
"  Extractus  pro  emoroidis  secundum  Lanfrancum. 
"  Extracta  emoroidarurn  secundum  Lanfrancnm  bononensem  discretis- 
simum  magistrum  Regis  francie  qui  duos  libros  cirurgie  composuit,  viz. 
minorem  qui  incipit  sic  '  Attendens,  venerabilis  amice  Bernardo  componere 
librum,'  etc.  Majorem  vero  qui  incipit  sic.  'Protector  rite  sperancium 
dens  excelsus  et  gloriosus  cuius  nomen  sit  benedictum  in  secula,'  etc. 
T  '  Omne  quod  investigari  potest  vno  trium  modorum  investigari  potest  aut 
per  ejus  nomen,'  etc.  if  Item  extracta  ernoroidarum  secundum  magistrum Bernardnm  de  Gordon'  in  suo  libro,  quern  librum  composuit  dictus  Ber- nardus  apud  Montem  Pessulanum  i.[e.]  Mont  Pelers,  anno  dominimillesiino 
ccc°  iii°  et  anno  lecture  sue  xx°  qui  sic  incipit  '  Interrogatus  a  quodam Socrates  quomodo  posset  optime  dicere  Respondit  si  nichil  dixeris  nisi 
quod  optime  sciueris  nichil  autem  optime  scirnus  nisi  quod  a  nobis 
frequenter  dictum  est  et  quod  ab  omnibus  receptum  est.'  IF  Item  extracta 
a  pussionario  Magistri  Bartholomei  qui  sic  incipit :  '  Assiduis  peticionibus mi  karissime  compendiose  morborum  signa  causas  et  curas  inscriptis 
redigere  cogitis,'  etc.  IT  Item  extracta  a  micrologic  Magistri  Ricardi excellentis  Industrie  et  a  libro  Magistri  Rolandi  et  a  libro  Magistri  Gwidonis 
de  gracia  pauperum  et  a  practica  Rogeri  Baron.  Et  a  practica  Rogerini 
et  a  practica  Magistri  Johannitii  Jamarcii  et  Gilbertini  ac  aliorum  plurium 
expertorum  quorum  doctrinam  inspexi  et  practizando  que  experciora  reperi 
in  hoc  libello  domino  mediante  innotescent.  IT  Ricardus  qui  incipit  si  quid 
agam  preter  solitum  veniam  date  cun[c]ti.  ^f  Rolandus  Rogerus  Braun 
Rogerinus,  Johannitius,  Jamarcus,  Gwidoii,  Gilbertinus." Arderne  shows  here  the  extent  of  his  reading  in  connection  with 
haemorrhoids  in  the  same  manner  as  he  does  in  his  commentary  on  Giles 
of  Corbeuil's  treatise  de  Urinis,  where  he  also  quotes  his  authorities.  The first  thing  perhaps  that  strikes  us  is  the  number  of  books  to  which  he  had 
access.  Books  during  his  lifetime  were  a  luxury  of  the  rich,  and  those 
who  know  the  early  history  of  the  University  of  Oxford  will  remember 
the  gratitude  with  which  the  gifts  of  books  from  Duke  Humphry  and 
the  Duke  of  Bedford  were  received  from  1439  onwards,  as  "life-giving showers  wherewith  the  vineyard  was  rendered  fruitful,  and  from  which  an 
abundant  supply  of  oil  from  the  olive  trees  of  the  University  might  be 
expected."  Arderne  may,  of  course,  have  spent  his  fees  in  buying  MSS. just  as  some  of  us  do  at  the  present  day,  but  it  is  probable  that  he  had 
access  to  the  Libraries  of  his  patrons  like  John  of  Gaunt,  who  were  men 
of  letters  as  well  as  of  affairs,  and  he  was  thus  able  to  quote  verbatim  et 
literatim,  as  in  the  present  instance. 
Lanfrank  of  Milan,  as  baa  been  said  (cf.  Forewords,  p.  xxv),  was  a  pupil 
of  William  de  Salicet.  He  was  one  of  the  great  teachers  of  Surgery  at 
Paris,  and  died  in  1306.  The  "Chirurgia  magna"  was  issued  in  1295-6  as 
an  enlarged  edition  of  the  "  Chirurgia  parva  "  published  in  1270.  He  taught tliat  Anatomy  was  the  foundation  of  Surgery. 
Bernard  of  Gordon  was  Professor  at  Montpellier,  where  he  began  to 
teach  in  1285,  and  published  his  "  Lilium  medicina?  "  in  1305.  The  words 


Notes.     Page  55,  line  3  to  page,  55,  line  24.  123 
quoted  by  Arderne  are  printed  in  the  1542  edition  of  the  "Lilium"  as  the first  words  of  the  Preface.  Arderne  gives  the  date  as  1303.  The  Lyons 
and  Paris  editions  both  give  it  1305. 
Master  Bartholomew  of  Salernum  was  a  pupil  of  Constantinus  Africanus 
late  in  the  eleventh  century.  Arderne  is  mistaken  in  ascribing  the  "  Passion- 
arius  "  to  him.  The  book,  which  is  often  called  the  "  Passionarius  Galeni," was  really  written  by  Gariopontus,  a  teacher  at  Salernum  early  in  the 
eleventh  century.  The  edition  printed  at  Basel  in  1531  gives  the  authorship 
correctly,  but  the  Lyons  edition  in  1526  calls  it  Galen's. Master  Richard  seems  to  be  Richard  the  Englishman  already  mentioned. 
Cf.  11/2O,  p.  113.  He  was  also  called  Ricardus  senior,  and  was  a  Master  at 
Salerno  at  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century.  He  also  lived  in  France  and 
in  England.  His  book,  "  Micrologus,"  is  a  collection  of  short  treatises written  at  different  times:  (1)  Practica,  (2)  De  Urinis,  (3)  Anatomia, 
(4)  Repressiva,  (5)  Prognostica.  Taken  alone  Micrologns  would  probably 
refer  to  the  "  Practica."  None  of  Richard's  works  have  been  printed. 
Master  Roland  was  from  Parma,  and  he  edited  in  1264  the  "Practica 
Chirurgise,"  which  was  written  by  Master  Roger  in  1180.  Roger's  book 
was  sometimes  called  "  Rogerina,"  or  "Rogerina  major,  medius  et  minor." It  was  often  attributed  to  Roger  Bacon.  This  was  the  text-book  upon 
which  the  Four  Masters  wrote  their  celebrated  Commentary.  "  Roger  and 
Roland,"  says  Sir  Clifford  Allbntt  ("The  Historical  Relations  of  Medicine 
and  Surgery,"  Lond.  1905,  p.  27),  "stand  like  Twin  Brethren  in  the  dawn 
of  modern  medicine  bearing  the  very  names  of  romance.  Roger's  book was  no  mere  cooking  of  Albucasis.  Before  Theodoric,  Roger  refractured 
badly  united  bones.  For  haemorrhage  he  used  styptics,  the  suture  or  the 
ligature  ;.  the  ligature  he  learned  no  doubt  from  Paul." Master  Guido  is  Guy  de  Chauliac,  the  contemporary  of  Arderne,  for  he 
flourished  in  the  second  half  of  the  fourteenth  century.  Guy  took  orders 
and  was  physician  to  Pope  Clement  VI  at  Avignon  ;  Arderne  with  a  bias 
towards  religion  remained  a  layman.  Both  were  Master  surgeons.  Guido 
held  with  Lanfrank  that  Anatomy  was  the  basis  of  Surgery ;  Arderne 
drifted  towards  drugs,  words  and  charms,  and  knew  no  anatomy. 
Roger  de  Barone  or  de  Varone  is  credited  with  a  treatise  "  Summa 
Rogerii,1'  or  "  Practica  parva."  The  date  is  disputed,  but  it  was  probably written  at  Montpellier  late  in  the  thirteenth  century. 
Johannice  is  Johannitius  Honein  Ben  Ishak  (809-873),  the  son  of  a 
Christian  Apothecary,  and  one  of  the  great  translators  of  medical  works 
from  Greek  into  Arabic.  His  introduction  to  Galen's  "-Microtechni"  was 
issued  in  Latin  under  the  title  "  Lsagoge  Johannitii." Jamarcius,  in  all  probability,  is  Johannes  Jarnerius,  a  surgeon  of  the 
school  of  Salernum.  Guy  de  Chauliac  quotes  him  no  less  than  forty  times, 
and  says  in  one  passage:  "Jamerius  followed,  who  made  a  sort  of  rough surgery  in  which  there  were  many  pointless  things,  but  he  was  chiefly  a 
disciple  of  Roland  "  ('•  Puis  est  trouve  Jamier  qui  a  fait  quelque  Chirurgie brutale,  en  laquelle  il  a  mesle  plusieurs  fadeizes,  toutefois  en  beaucoup  de 
choses  il  a  suivy  Rogier,"  Cap.  i,  p.  14,  Ed.  Nicaise).  Dr.  Pansier  (Janus, 1903)  gives  an  account  of  the  manuscripts  of  his  works  at  Oxford  and 
Paris,  and  Prof.  Pagel  of  Berlin  has  published  a  manuscript  of  his  surgery 
(Berlin,  1909),  under  the  title  "  Chirurgia  Jamati." Master  Gilbertyne  is  Gilbert  the  Englishman.     Cf.  11/2O,  p.  113. 
55/17.  Alienee  is  clearly  a  variant  of  Anent,  i.  e.  "according  to." 
55/24.  This  passage  shows  how  little  the  people  have  learned  about 
medical  terms  since  John  Arderne  wrote  this  treatise.  "Piles"  is  still  a 
generic  name  for  all  diseases  of  the  rectum  in  the  out-patient  room  of  a 


124  Notes.     Page  55,  line  29  to  page  59,  line  32. 
hospital,  and  no  one  who  has  had  much  experience  takes  a  diagnosis  of  piles 
as  correct  until  he  has  verified  it  by  examination. 
60/29.  John  Damascene  is  the  name  under  which  the  fourteenth- 
century  writers  on  surgery  concealed  the  identity  of  the  elder  Serapion,  who 
lived  in  the  ninth  century.  Some  of  his  works  were  published  under  the name  of  Janus  Damascenns.  The  Pandects  in  seven  books  were  translated 
into  Latin  under  the  name  of  the  Breviarium.  Cf.  12/i,  p.  113. 
56/y.  Avicenna,  the  Prince  of  Science,  was  born  near  Bokhara  in  980  A.D. 
and  early  showed  his  precocity,  for  he  knew  the  Koran  and  several  books  of 
philosophy  by  heart  when  he  was  ten  years  old.  His  genius  turned  first  to 
law,  but  at  the  age  of  16  he  had  made  such  progress  in  medicine  as  to 
warrant  his  appointment  as  personal  physician  to  the  Sultan  Ben  Mansur. 
"  Wein,  Weib  und  Gesang  "  killed  him  at  the  age  of  57,  in  June  1037,  but 
not  before  he  had  written  his  "  Canon,"  which  was  translated  into  Latin  in the  twelfth  century  and  remained  a  text-book  until  the  middle  of  the seventeenth  century. 
57/3O.  Morpheiv  was  a  general  name  given  to  skin  eruptions  which 
changed  their  colour.  The  white  morphew  appears  to  have  been  an  early 
stage  of  leprosy  in  some  cases ;  vitiligo  in  others.  Black  morphew 
was  a  general  term  which  included  many  different  diseases  of  the  skin. 
59/32.  uiEgidius  Corboliensis,  or  Gilles  de  Corbeil,  was  descended  from  the 
Counts  of  Corbeil,  and  devoted  himself  to  the  study  of  medicine  at  Salerno. 
He  is  said  to  have  taught  medicine  at  that  school,  and  afterwards  from  the 
end  of  the  twelfth  to  the  beginning  of  the  thirteenth  century  to  have  lived 
at  Paris  as  Major-domo  and  Physician  to  Philip  Augustus  (1180-1223). 
His  two  works,  "  De  Urinis,  de  Pulsibus,  de  Virtutibus  et  laudibus  com- 
positorum  medicamentornm"  and  "  De  Signis  et  symptomatibus  segritudi- 
num  ' '  are  in  metre  and  expressed  in  classical  Latin  far  superior  to  that  of contemporary  medical  authors.  Arderne  wrote  a  commentary  in  English 
upon  the  "  Tractatus  de  urinis,"  and  a  copy  of  it  exists  in  the  Hunterian Library  at  Glasgow.  It  is  described  in  the  Catalogue  (p.  264)  as : — 328. ^Egidii  Corboliensis,  Tractatus  Metricus  de  Vrinis.  Master  John  Arderne, 
Commentary  in  English  on  the  above  Treatise  "De  Vrinis."  (Press  Mark U.  7.  22;  Q.  7.  16;  Q.  7.  130.)  Description.  Vellum  7fx5£  ff.  68, 
originally  ft'.  69  (or  ff.  70),  well  written  in  a  plain  hand  in  single  cols,  of about  29  lines,  each  5f-5£x3J,  margined  with  brown  crayon,  not  ruled, signatures,  traces  only  left,  practically  all  gnawed  off  (by  beetles)  where 
not  cropped,  catchwords,  foliation  modern  (in  pencil),  rubrics,  rubricated 
initials  and  IF  IT,  running  titles,  initials  touched  with  vermilion,  marginalia 
much  cropped,  writing  retouched  in  places,  fol.  sec.  blank.  Early  Cent.  xv. 
Binding,  thin  beech  boards,  covered  quarter  calf,  coarse  dark  blue  paper 
sides.  Early  Cent,  xviii. 
Collation.  Two  paper  fly-leaves  (i2)  both  attached  ||  I8— 38,  47  (8), 
5*— 7s,  87(8),  9(6).  Two  fly-leaves  (ii2),  ii,  2.  attached;  4,  6  is  cut  out (probably  to  remove  a  miswritten  leaf  as  the  text  is  continuous)  ;  8,  3  is  a 
half  sheet  (probably  so  originally). 
Contents: — i.  .ZEgidius  (Gilles)  of  Corbeil's  Treatise  (in  Latin  verse) 
on  Urines,  with  Master  John  Arderne' s  Commentary. 
Begins  (1.  i  (f.  i)  r°.  lines  1-8) ;  E  (rubricated  initial  with  gestures)  go Magister  Johannes  Arderonn  hanc  (struck  out)  hoc  (above)  opusculum 
composui/de  Jndicijs/ Vrinarum  per  colores  et  contenta  secuncliim  Indi- 
cium/Egidij.  et  ypocratis.  Walterij.  Gilis.  Gilbert!,  Gordoni.  Johannis  de/ 
Sancto  Amando.  ysaac.  Auicenne.  theophili,  Galyeni.  Galterij/et  tholomej. 
in  medicinam  et  medicum  domiri  regis  illustrissimi  /  principis  henrici 


Notes.     Page  60,  line  6  to  page  62,  line  32  125 
quart!  cuius  anime  propicietur  deus.  Amen.  /  de.  nigra.  vrina.  capitulura 
primum. 
Ends  (6,  5  (f.  44)  v°.  line  26) ;  IT  vryn  black  and  watery  in  a  fat  manne mortem  significat. 
60/6.  Noli-me-tangere.  Guy  de  Chauliac  (ivme  traite"  Doct.  i,  ch.  vi, p.  318,  Ed.  Nicaise),  speaking  of  chancre  ulcere,  says  that  Guillaume  de 
Salicet  called  it  "Noli-me-tangere  because  the  more  it  was  meddled  with the  worse  it  became  (Finalement,  Guillaume  de  Salicet  juge,  que  chancre 
est  maladie  despiteuse  et  fascheuse,  d'autant  que  plus  on  la  manie,  plus il  est  indigne.  Parquoy  il  conseille  que  ne  soit  touche,  sinon  legerement, 
et  a  cette  cause  est  appelle  Noli-me-tangere)."  I  cannot  find  the  passage 
in  Pifteau's  edition  of  Salicet's  Surgery. 
60/24.  Millefoile  is  the  yarrow — Achillaea  Millefolium — though  Apuleius, 
according  to  Dr.  Prior,  seems  to  have  meant  the  horse-tail,  Equisetum. 
60/27.  Bursa  pastoris  is  the  Shepherd's  purse,  Capsella  bursa,  which was  long  considered  an  excellent  styptic. 
Pan-ends  is  the  Periwinkle,  the  Vinca  major  and  minor.  It  seems  to have  derived  its  name  from  the  Latin  Perivincula  because  it  was  used  for 
chaplets. 
61/5  and  12.  So  long  as  the  blood  was  looked  upon  as  stationary  it  was a  common  belief  that  the  vein  from  which  the  blood  was  taken  altered  the 
result.  Arderne  teaches  here  that  letting  blood  from  the  external  saphenous 
vein  stopped  bleeding  from  a  pile,  whilst  bleeding  from  the  internal 
saphenous  vein  increased  the  haemorrhage. 
61/22.  The  vena  salvatella  (cf.  49/38,  p.  121)  ran  along  the  back 
of  the  hand  between  the  third  and  fourth  metacarpal  bones.  Patients 
were  bled  from  it  when  they  were  chronic  invalids  owing  to  "  congestion 
of  the  liver  or  spleen,"  says  Prof.  Nicaise. 
61/23.  There  is  here  a  clear  distinction  made  between  the  clumsy 
phlebotome  with  its  h albert  shape  and  the  more  delicate  and  easily  mani- 
pulated lancet  (cf.  24/2 1). 
62/6.  It  is  clear  from  this  passage  that  Arderne  was  as  unwilling  to 
demean  himself  by  breathing  a  vein  as  we  should  now  be  to  crop  a  poll. 
Both  were  the  duties  of  the  barber,  who  was  clearly  in  an  inferior 
position. 
62/14.  This  mutilated  passage  runs  in  another  English  translation 
(Sloane  MS.  No.  76),  "Alsoe  Gordon  saythe  that  in  ouer  mich  or  greate fluxe  in  reasonable  aged  persones  nothinge  avayletli  moare  then  pourginge, 
for  the  grosse  and  slymye  matter  being  pourged  awaye  the  rnedicyns 
restrictyue  shull  worke  the  better.  Mirobalans  will  worke  excellently  in 
that  case  for  they  pourge  before  and  stoppe  after  them,  that  is,  it  loseneth 
by  reason  of  his  swiftness  in  digestion  and  bringeth  forth  all  grosse  humour 
with  yt.  yt  must  be  warely  prepared,  whose  preparation  is  J)is.  It  must 
be  dissolved  with  warme  mylke  and  whaye  and  not  boyled  or  sodden  with 
anythinge,  for  by  boylinge  the  gummy  substance  vadeth  awaye  in  the 
sinooke  and  so  the  strength  thereof  ys  weakened." 
62/32.  The  meaning  of  this  passage  seems  obscure  at  first,  but  Arderne 
says  that  myrobalani  in  their  different  forms  were  good  against  the  different 
humours  recognised  by  the  ancient  physicians — Sanguis,  choler,  melancholia 
and  phlegma.  "  Myrobalani  are  the  fruit  of  several  species  of  Terminalia 
and  of  the  Phyllanthus  emblica,"  says  "Mayne's  Expository  Lexicon" (Sydenham  Soc.  edition).  They  contain  a  large  quantity  of  tannin  and  in 


126          Notes.     Page  63,  line  22  to  page  64,  line  6. 
the  M.  chebulae  some  gallic  acid.  They  were  much  employed  by  the 
Arabian  physicians  in  many  diseases  ;  some  lauding  them  as  emetics  and 
cathartics  which  purged  away  all  evil  humours  ;  and  others  as  useful  in 
the  treatment  of  diarrhoea  and  dysentery,  acting  first  as  a  laxative  and  then 
as  an  astringent — the  view  taken  by  Arderne,  cf.  62/14.  They  were 
formerly  much  employed  in  European  medicine,  but  are  not  now  used. 
The  dose  was  2  to  8  drachms.  Myrobalani  citrina  is  the  fruit  of  a  variety 
of  Terminalia  chebulae  ;  they  were  sometimes  called  White  Galls.  Kebuliz is  the  fruit  of  the  terminalia  chebula  which  resembles  M.  bellericae  in 
figure  and  ridges,  but  is  larger  and  darker  with  a  thicker  pulp. 
Indi,  or  Myrobalani  indicse,  are  probably  the  unripe  fruit  of  Terminalia 
chebula  and  T.  bellerica.  These  black  myrobalans  are  oblong  shaped  and have  no  stone. 
The  belleric  myrobalans  are  the  fruit  of  Terminalia  bellerica.  They  are 
yellowish -grey  in  colour  and  roundish  or  oblong  in  shape.  The  Emblici are  the  produce  of  the  Emblica  officinalis  or  the  Phyllanthus  emblica,  a 
plant  inhabiting  the  East  Indies  and  frequently  cultivated.  The  dried 
fruits  are  used  as  a  purge  and  also  as  a  tanning  agent. 
63/22.  Storax  calamita  is  the  dry  resin  of  the  Storax  tree. 
68/25.  Porcelane  or  Porcelayne  is  the  older  name  of  Portulaca  com- munis,  purslane.  It  was  recommended  at  first  as  a  great  assuager  of 
choleric  heat ;  afterwards  as  a  cure  for  scurvy  and  all  skin  eruptions ;  and 
lastly  as  an  ingredient  in  salads. 
68/29.  The  Latin  text  gives  lapis  haematites  for  lapis  omoptoes. 
Haematites.  The  bloodstone  is  found  in  iron  mines  in  Germany  and 
Bohemia  of  a  black,  yellowish,  or  iron  colour.  The  best  is  brittle,  very 
black  and  even,  free  from  filth,  and  of  a  Cinnabar-like  colour.  It  is  to  be 
reduced  into  a  most  subtile  powder  by  levigation  with  plantain  water.  It 
is  good  against  the  gout,  fluxes  of  the  Womb  and  Belly,  spitting  blood  and 
bleeding  at  the  nose  ;  mixed  with  woman's  milk  it  helps  blear  eyes  and suffusions. 
Ypoquistid  is  Hypocistis,  the  juice  of  the  root  of  the  shrub  Cistis  or 
Holly  Rose  dried  in  the  sun.  It  was  regarded  as  an  astringent,  and  Acacia was  used  as  a  substitute  for  it.  Sumalc  is  the  rlius  obsoniorum  of  which 
the  fruits  were  looked  upon  as  cooling  and  astringent. 
Quinque-Nervia  is  the  Plantago  lanceolata  or  Ribwort,  of  which  the 
distilled  water  "  helps  spitting  and  pissing  blood,  and  the  Ptysick,  stops the  Courses,  eases  the  Cholick  and  heals  a  Dysenteria,  cools  inflammations, 
dissolves  nodes  and  mundifies  Fistulas.  The  Essence  is  better,"  says Salmon  in  1678. 
64/r.  This  passage  is  given  in  greater  detail  in  the  later  English  trans- 
lation (Sloane  MS.  76),  where  it  runs:  "Of  the  Emmorroydes  and  Men- strualles.  The  Emorroydes  or  menstrualles  flowinge  strongely,  or  the 
pacient  sore  afflicted  with  the  force  of  blood,  ye  must  consider  of  the 
suerest  waye  and  that  which  returns  blood  fastest.  First,  if  the  pacient  be 
not  very  weake,  let  him  bleed  somethinge  of  both  Basillic  vaynes  of  the 
arme  and  set  cuppinge  glasses  under  woman's  breistes  and  so  doinge  and by  bindinge  the  armes  paynedly  will  provoke  the  humours  to  returne,  and 
after  that  use  local  remedyes." 
64/6.  Muscilage  dragaunte.  This  should  certainly  be  Muscilage  Draga- gant.  Arderne  is  careful  to  explain  the  difference  between  Dragaunte  and 
Dragagant.  79/3-4.  Dragant  is  a  crude  sulphate,  acting  as  an  astringent, whilst  dragagant  is  tragacanth. 


Notes.     Page  64,  line  11  to  page  66,  line  3.  127 
64/n.  Red  coral  was  long  used  as  an  astringent  in  diarrhoea  and  in 
the  form  of  a  compound  syrup,  and  it  was  employed  as  a  teething  powder 
for  children.  It  is  still  used  as  a  charm  against  the  evil  eye  in  London, 
for  most  babies'  rattles  mounted  in  silver  are  tipped  with  a  piece  of  red coral. 
64/13.  Canell.  Arderne's  translator  uses  canell  throughout  as  the equivalent  of  Cinnamomum. 
64/1 8.  Coprose  is  Green  Vitriol.  Salmon  says  in  1678  :  "  This  owes  its colour  to  Iron  ;  in  London  it  is  well  known  that  most  of  the  old  iron  which 
is  gathered  by  many  poor  people  is  sold  to  the  Copperas  houses  at  Rother- 
hith  and  Deptford,  which  they  boil  up  with  a  dissolution  of  the  Pyrites, 
which  is  a  stone  found  on  the  shore  of  the  Isle  of  Shepey  and  other  such 
like  places,  and  let  the  liquor  run  out  into  convenient  vessels  or  Cisterns 
in  which  it  shoots  into  those  forms  we  meet  with  amongst  druggists.  It  is 
chiefly  used  as  an  Astringent." 
64/25.  Kynnyng  is  clearly  a  variant  of  the  more  common  form  chine, 
to  burst  open  or  split.  It  is  still  in  familiar  use,  as  in  the  Chines  of  the 
Isle  of  Wight. 
64/32.  Arderne  shows  both  in  this  passage  and  in  previous  ones  (cf. 
7/39,  P-  H2)  that  neurasthenia  was  not  unknown  in  his  practice. 
64/36.  Clyffyng.  This  is  an  early  instance  of  the  confusion  between 
Cliff  and  clift,  the  original  form  of  Cleft. 
66/27.  Psidie  was  pomegranate  rind  :  Balaustia  being  the  flowers  of 
the  wild  pomegranate — Punica  sylvestris. 
Mumme  was  divided  into  five  forms.  (1)  A  factitious  made  of  bitumen 
and  Pitch-Pissasphaltum  ;  (2)  Flesh  of  the  carcase  dried  in  the  Sun,  in  the country  of  the  Hammonians  between  Cyrene  and  Alexandria,  being 
Passengers  buried  in  the  Quick-sands  ;  (3)  ./Egyptian,  a  liquor  sweating from  carcases  embalmed  with  Pissasphalttim  ;  (4)  Arabian,  a  liquor  which 
sweats  from  carcases  embalmed  with  Myrrh,  Aloes,  and  Balsam ;  (5) 
Artificial,  which  is  Modern.  Of  all  which  the  two  last  are  the  best,  but  the 
Arabian  is  scarcely  to  be  got ;  the  second  and  third  sorts  are  sold  for  it. 
The  artificial  or  modern  mummy  is  made  thus  :  "  Take  the  carcase  of  a 
young  man  (some  say  red  hair'd)  not  dying  of  a  disease,  but  killed  ;  let  it lie  24  hours  in  clear  water  in  the  Air  ;  cut  the  flesh  in  pieces,  to  which 
add  powder  of  myrrh  and  a  little  Aloes ;  imbibe  it  24  hours  in  the  spirit 
of  wine  and  Turpentine,  take  it  out,  hang  it  up  twelve  hours  ;  imbibe  it 
again  24  hours  in  fresh  spirit,  then  hang  up  the  pieces  in  dry  air  and  a 
shadowy  place,  so  will  they  dry  and  not  stink."  (Salmon,  "The  New 
London  Dispensatory,"  1678,  p.  194.)  There  was  a  tincture,  an  essence,  an elixir  and  a  balsam  of  this  precious  medicine.  It  dissolved  congealed  and 
coagulated  blood,  provoked  the  terms,  expelled  the  wind  out  of  both  the 
bowels  and  the  Veins,  helped  Coughs  and  was  a  great  Vulnerary.  It  was 
also  said  to  purge.  The  dose  was  a  drachm. 
Olibanum  is  frankincense,  the  resin  obtained  from  Boswellia  Carteri. 
It  was  employed  as  a  stimulating  expectorant,  as  an  emmenagogue,  as  an 
ointment  in  skin  diseases  and  some  diseases  of  the  eyes,  and  as  an  ingre- 
dient of  stimulating  plasters. 
66/3.  Red  Jasper  was  considered  to  be  of  the  nature  of  the  blood  stone, 
for  it  not  only  stops  bleedings  at  the  nose  and  other  fluxes  of  blood  but also  the  flux  of  the  terms. 
Saphir.     "  The  Saphire  is  either  Oriental  or  Occidental,  and  of  each 


128          Notes.     Page  66,  line  4  to  page  67,  line  34. 
there  are  Male  and  Female.  It  is  a  glorious,  clear,  transparent,  blew,  or 
sky-coloured  stone,  these  are  the  Males.  The  females  are  white  and 
unripe,  so  they  want  colour.  The  stone  laid  whole  to  the  forehead  stays 
the  bleeding  at  the  nose.  You  may  dissolve  it  in  juice  of  Lemons  or  Spirit 
of  Vinegar  and  so  use  it ;  drunk  in  wine  it  helps  against  the  stinging  of 
scorpions.  You  may  also  beat  it  into  a  powder  and  levigate  it  with 
rosewater." "The  Ruby  or  Carbuncle  is  either  white  or  red  ;  being  drunk,  it  restrains 
Lust  and  makes  a  man  lively  and  cheerful." 
66/4.  The  dung  of  swine  helps  the  bitings  and  stinging  of  serpents, 
Scorpions,  and  Mad-dogs.  It  softens,  discusses,  and  cures  hard  tumours, 
Scrophulas,  Corns,  Warts,  Bleeding  at  the  nose,  Itch,  Small-pox,  Scabs, Fractures,  Luxations,  Wounds,  Burns,  Scalds,  stops  Bleeding,  etc. 
66/7.  The  belief  in  the  juice  of  nettle  as  a  blood  purifier  still  lingers 
among  us.  As  a  child  I  had  repeated  attacks  of  urticaria  ;  on  several occasions  I  was  ordered  a  tumblerful  of  the  infusion  of  nettles  to  be  taken 
hot  and  in  the  morning,  fasting,  but  so  far  as  I  remember  without  effect 
either  in  shortening  the  intervals  between  the  attacks  or  curing  their 
painfulness. 
66/19.  A  streit  wound :  cf.  "  streit  is  the  gate  and  narrow  is  the  way 
which  leadeth  unto  life''  (Matt.  vii.  14). 
66/25.  Arderne  here  recommends  the  use  of  acupressure  as  a  means  of 
arresting  haemorrhage. 
67/8.  Comyn.  Dr.  Prior  derives  this  word  from  the  Arabic  al 
qamoun.  It  is  the  Cuminum  cyminum.  Its  seeds  have  long  been  in 
general  use  as  a  stomachic. 
67/13.  Orpine  is  the  Sedum  Telephium,  a  well-known  inmate  of  the cottage  garden,  being  esteemed  as  a  vulnerary.  The  Latin  text  gives 
Succus  ebulse,  juice  of  the  Danewort  or  Dwarf  elder. 
67/28.  The  Lombards  as  an  enterprising  trading  community  in  London 
are  mentioned  again  in  the  Treatise  on  Clysters  ;  cf.  76/32. 
67/28.  Two  kinds  of  ink  seem  to  have  been  used  by  the  surgeons  in 
the  fourteenth  century,  Attramentum  and  Encaustum.  The  Attramen- 
tum  seems  to  have  been  a  sulphate  containing  powdered  galls,  whilst  the 
encaustum — literally,  purple  ink  reserved  for  the  royal  use — was  made  with Chalcantum,  a  generic  name  for  the  sulphates  of  copper,  iron  and  zinc. 
Salicet  (Ed.  Pifteau,  p.  207)  used  the  purple  ink  to  stain  the  bone  for  the 
purpose  of  discovering  a  line  or  fracture  of  the  skull.  Henri  de  Monde- 
ville  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  506)  marked  out  his  flaps  with  it  before  amputating. 
Guy  de  Chauliac  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  343)  employs  attramentum  (cf.  40/2/, 
p.  119),  as  a  local  astringent  in  piles,  and  (p.  521)  uses  the  purple  ink  for 
surface  marking. 
67/31.  Bdellium  is  a  gum  resin  somewhat  resembling  very  impure 
myrrh.  It  is  the  product  of  various  species  of  Balsamodendron. 
67/32.  Anteros  was  anthera,  semen  rosarum.  Rose  threads,  viz.  the 
yellow  threads  in  the  middle  of  the  flowers.  They  were  used  with  dentri- frices  and  to  dry  up  defluxions. 
67/34.  This  Demetrius  may  have  been  Demetrius  II,  King  of  Georgia, 
son  of  David  III,  who  came  to  the  throne  in  1126  and  died  1158.  He  was 
constantly  at  war  with  the  Mussulmen.  It  may  have  been  his  son 
Demetrius  III  who  died  1289.  Arderne  perhaps  heard  the  story  from 
those  who  had  been  to  Lithuania  with  Sir  Geoffrey  Scrope.  Cf.  14/4,  p.  114. 


Notes.     Page  67,  line  39  to  page  72,  line  27.         129 
67/39  and  68/1.  The  Cuckoo's  Bread  is  the  Oxalis  Acetosella.  It  is called  also  Cuckoo's  Meat  or  Gowk's  Meat  and  Wood  Sorrel.  It  was called  Hallelujah  because  it  blossomed  between  Easter  and  Whitsuntide, 
the  season  at  which  the  113th  to  the  117th  Psalms  were  sung.  Arderne's translator  calls  it  Alleluia.  Cf.  68/1. 
68/14.  Galang  is  the  name  given  to  two  kinds  of  roots  obtained  from  a 
species  of  Alpinia,  the  greater  and  smaller  galanga.  The  word  itself  is 
said  to  be  a  corruption  of  the  Chinese  liang-kiang,  mild  ginger. 
69/1.  Arderne  gives  the  reason  for  using  Crocus  or  Saffron  with  opium 
(cf.  101/35),  because  it  acted  as  a  bridle  to  that  drug. 
69/14.  This  appears  to  be  the  original  prescription  for  the  Valence 
which  handed  Arderne's  name  down  to  posterity  until  after  the  publication 
of  the  "  Pharmacopoeia  Londinensis."  (Cf.  Forewords,  pp.  xxx-xxxi.)  My copy,  Baid  to  be  the  editio  quarta,  with  the  frontispiece  dated  1632,  says 
(p.  155),  "  Valentia  Scabiosas  lohannis  Ardernii,  ex  Oppido  (vulgo)  Newark in  Comitatu  Nottingham  ;  Chirurgi  exerciatissimi ;  qui  floruit  anno  1370 ; 
tempore  Edouardi  tertii  Regis  Angliae,  ipsissimis  verbis  ex  antique 
manuscripto  excerpta.  .  .  Tapsivalencia  ejusdem  authoris.  .  .  Tapsimel 
ejusdem.  .  .  Haec  ad  verbum  ex  veteri  Manuscripto  et  stylo  suo. 
69/2Q.  Populeon  was  an  ointment  made  from  the  buds  of  the  white 
poplar  or  Aspen  tree.  Cf.  77/3. 
70/19.  Furfur  is  Bran.  It  entered  very  largely  into  the  materia  medica of  the  older  leeches. 
71/21.  A  ivelked  grape;  cf.  Chaucer,  Pardoner's  Tale,  1.  270,  "  For  which 
ful  pale  and  welked  is  my  face,"  in  the  sense  of  wrinkled  or  shrivelled. 
71/26.  This  short  treatise  on  Tenesmus  is  excellent  from  a  professional 
point  of  view,  and  it  does  not  appear  that  the  use  of  the  term  has  mate- 
rially altered  in  the  course  of  the  centuries  which  have  elapsed  since Arderne  wrote  it. 
71-74.  These  are  the  passages  which  show  Arderne  to  be  a  first-rate 
observer  independent  of  book  work.  The  prognosis  holds  good  to  this 
day.  If  the  enema  is  returned  at  once  either  the  bowel  is  paralysed  because 
the  patient  is  moribund  from  some  obstruction  which  may  be  situated 
high  up,  or  there  may  be  an  obstruction  near  the  anus  without  paralysis,  or 
the  bowel  is  blocked  by  the  impaction  of  faeces  consequent  upon  obstinate 
constipation.  In  the  last  case  the  patient  may  recover,  and  Arderne  says 
therefore  that  his  rule  is  not  without  exceptions. 
72/9.  Diagredium  is  made  from  scammony  by  putting  the  powder  into 
a  hollow  quince,  covering  it  with  a  paste  and  baking  it  in  an  oven  or under  ashes. 
72/12.  The  iliac  passion  was  a  general  name  for  intestinal  obstruction 
at  a  time  when  morbid  anatomy  was  unknown.  It  included  a  variety  of 
conditions  from  simple  colic  to  suppurative  peritonitis  in  all  its  forms. 
The  scene  closed  with  fsecal  vomiting,  as  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to 
treat  it  by  surgical  means. 
72/2O.  Scariola  is  the  endive,  Cichorium  Endivia. 
72/23.  The  dusty  meel  of  the  milne  is  only  the  finest  flour  used  as  a 
vehicle  to  make  the  grease  and  honey  into  a  mass. 
72/27.  Cabbage,  Brassica  sativa  or  Caulis,  was  much  used  by  the 
school  of  Salernum,  and  Arderne  mentions  it  previously.  Cf.  70/ig  and 
72/27. 
ARDERNE.  K 


130          Notes.     Page  72,  line  28  to  page  77,  line  3. 
72/28.  Fenigreke  is  the  faenum  graecum,  whose  seeds  were  used  in 
emollient  clysters,  for  they  are  mucilaginous. 
73/6.  Mellilote  is  here  explained  by  Arderne  as  the  tops  of  colewort, 
but  the  term  is  usually  applied  to  M.  officinalis,  the  dried  flowers  of  which 
were  used  for  making  poultices.  Two  varieties  were  recognised,  the  white 
and  the  yellow. 
73/3O.  The  translator  has  omitted  the  passage  about  the  ostrich  feather 
and  the  Prince  of  Wales  which  is  given  in  Forewords,  p.  xxvii.  It  should come  after  the  word  lure, 
73/32.  Oimbalarie  is  the  Pennywort — Linaria  Cymbalaria — so  called 
from  its  round  leaves.  It  was  good  "  against  all  inflammations  and  hot 
tumours,  St.  Antonie's  fire  and  Kibed  heels." 
74/2.  Triasantalorum.  There  were  three  kinds  of  Sandal  in  use, 
alburn,  rufum,  and  citrinum.  Triasantalorum  therefore  is  a  confection  of 
the  three  Sandals  just  as  Diatritonpipereon  is  a  confection  of  the  three 
peppers. 
74/26.  Salicet  (Ed.  Pifteau)  gives  two  formulas  (pp.  171  and  504)  for 
making  an  unguentum  apostolorum.  The  ointment  contained  white  wax  : 
pine  resin  :  aristolochia  :  incense  :  mastic  :  opoponax  :  myrrh  :  galbanum, 
litharge,  etc.  Guy  de  Chauliac  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  617)  gives  a  similar  formula, 
and  adds  that  Mesue  named  it  Ceraseos,  but  Master  Anserin  de  la  Porte 
and  Master  Pierre  de  1'Argentiere  of  Montpellier  call  it  Gratia  Dei,  because it  cures  bad  ulcers  so  wonderfully.  Henri  de  Mondeville  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p. 
800)  calls  it  the  green  ointment  of  the  Twelve  Apostles  on  account  of  its 
twelve  chief  ingredients,  and  states  that  some  writers  call  it  Unguentum 
Apostolicon,  others  Unguentum  Veneris,  or  simply  the  Plaister. 
74/30.  Pellitory  of  the  wall  is  the  Parietaria  officinalis.  It  grows  on 
old  walls  and  was  thought  to  draw  lime  from  the  mortar. 
74/31.  Allusion  to  this  interpolation  in  the  text  is  made  in  Forewords 
(p.  xii).  It  shows  that  the  translation  here  printed  cannot  be  earlier 
than  1413,  the  year  of  Henry  IV's  death. 
74/33.  The  short  treatise  on  Enemata  is  written  to  show  Arderne's improvements  in  apparatus  as  well  as  in  methods.  He  is,  as  usual,  ahead 
of  his  contemporaries  in  simplifying  both. 
75/23.  Rerepigre.  This  word  seems  to  be  a  mistake  of  the  copyist 
for  Hiera  pigre,  Yera  pigra,  or  iera  pigra.  The  sacred  bitter,  an  aloetic 
purgative  which  has  long  been  popular.  Dr.  Payne  says  it  is  still  sold  in 
the  shops  of  herbalists  under  the  debased  name  of  "  Hackry-Packry."  The usual  formula  was  that  given  by  Galen. 
76/ig.  Mercurialis.  The  English  mercury — chenopodium  is  sometimes 
called  Good  Henry — the  all-good,  to  distinguish  it  from  a  poisonous  form. 
The  Grimms  in  their  "  Wbrterbuch  "  explain  this  name  as  having  reference  to 
elves  and  kobolds,  which  were  called  "  Heinz  "  or  "  Heinrich,"  and  as indicating  supernatural  powers  in  the  plant  (Dr.  Prior,  p.  94).  It  W;IB 
thought  to  be  laxative,  and  was  long  given  by  nurses  to  children  with their  food. 
76/32.  Lombards.     Cf.  67/28,  p.  128. 
76/36.  This  passage  may  mean  either  that  the  patients  came  to  Arderne, 
or  that  they  were  relieved  before  he  got  home  again. 
77/3.  Popilion.    Cf.  69/29,  p.  129. 


Notes.     Page  77,  line  12  to  page  81,  line  30.          131 
11 1 12.  This  is  an  eurly  use  of  the  treatment  of  chronic  constipation  by 
abdominal  massage,  which  has  lately  become  fashionable  again. 
78/25.  Arderne  is  here  advocating  rectal  feeding  which  is  now  commonly used  and  with  excellent  results. 
79/1.  This  last  treatise  is  only  a  fragment  in  the  present  translation. 
A  much  fuller  text  is  found  in  the  Bodleian  Library,  where  it  exists  in 
three  parts.  The  first  MS.,  Ashmole  1434,  leaf  117,  begins  "  Attramento- 
rum,  t.  e.  vitriolorum,"  and  ends  "  facit  calcantum."  This  corresponds, therefore,  with  p.  79,  line  1  to  page  81,  line  23.  The  second  part  is  in 
MS.  Digby  161,  leaf  16.  It  begins,  "  Alumen  zucarinum  vulgariter  alum- 
glaa,"  and  ends  leaf  23,  back,  "  nobillissimnm  est  ad  regem."  The  transla- tion only  contains  a  small  part  of  this  as  it  ends  at  page  85,  line  22.  The 
third  part  is  in  Ashmole  MS.  1434,  leaf  128,  back,  to  leaf  131.  It  gives  a 
good  account  of  Arderne's  treatment  of  Scabies  by  which  he  made  a  great deal  of  money  (cf.  6/4,  p.  111). 
79/r.  This  passage  explains  itself.  Dragagant  is  Tragacanth,  a  gummy 
exudation  obtained  from  incisions  made  in  the  stem  of  Astragalus  gemmifer. 
It  is  a  demulcent  and  is  still  used  in  medicine  as  a  vehicle  to  suspend 
heavy  and  insoluble  powders  like  the  subnitrate  of  bismuth. 
79/4.  Dragant  is  a  modification  of  Chalcanthum  from  chalcis  or  vitriol 
romanum.  Cf.  64/6.  Calcothar  is  the  red  oxide  of  iron  obtained  by 
calcining  sulphate  of  iron  or  green  coperose. 
79/IO.  Platearius  was  the  name  of  a  distinguished  medical  family  living 
in  the  twelfth  century.  John,  the  elder,  wrote  "  Practica  brevia"  and 
"  Regulee  urinarum."  John,  the  son,  wrote  "  Tractatus  de  sagritudinum 
curatione "  and  "  De  conferentibus  et  nocentibus  corporis  humani." Matthew,  brother  of  John  the  son,  made  a  name  for  himself,  but  his  writ- 
ings are  unknown.  Matthew  (floruit  1130-1150),  grandson  of  John  the 
elder  and  son  of  John  the  younger,  wrote  "  De  simplici  medicina  liber," 
quoted  from  the  first  words  of  the  text  as  "circa  instans."  John,  the tliird  eon  of  Matthew  the  elder  and  therefore  cousin  of  Matthew  "  circa 
inatans,"  was  also  known  to  fame. 
79/1 8.  Venemyd  wound.  The  expression  is  still  in  common  use,  only 
we  say  a  "  poisoned  wound,"  and  bacteriology  has  given  us  an  explanation of  its  occurrence. 
79/27.  Fraudulent  ulcers.  Guy  de  Chauliac  divides  ulcers  into 
corrosive,  sordid,  cavernous,  fistulous  and  chancre.  The  fraudulent  ulcer  is 
sordid,  the  characters  are  a  sore  or  stinking  scab.  Henri  de  Mondeville 
also  describes  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  421,  note)  a  fraudulent  corrosive  ulcer. 
80/27.  Lutum  sapiencice,  also  called  lutum  sapientum,  was  used  by  the 
alchemists  for  sealing  their  vessels.  It  was  made  with  flour,  white  of  egg, 
chalk  and  clay. 
80/39.  Arderne  uses  marice  as  the  special  term  for  the  uterus,  and  em- 
ploys the  word  womb  where  we  should  say  "  belly."  Cf.  11/24,  P-  H3. 
81/ri.  Pulv:  hermodactilej.  Hermodactylus  is  a  name  given  to  many 
plants  with  tuberous  roots,  notably  to  hermodactylus  tuberosus.  One  form 
was  used  as  a  cure  for  gout,  and  may  have  been  colchicum. 
81/30.  The  scab  is  here  scabies  or  the  itch,  a  contagious  disease 
which  the  habits  of  the  time  made  prevalent  through  every  class  of 
society. 


132  Notes.     Page  82,  line  31  to  page  89,  line  7. 
82/31.  Arsenic  was  known  at  this  time  in  the  forms  of  the  yellow  sulph- 
ide, orpiment  or  Auripigmentum,  and  the  red  sulphide  or  Realgar.  Arderne 
gives  an  interesting  and  evidently  truthful  account  of  his  early  experiences 
with  the  drug  as  a  local  application.  Henri  de  Mondeville  held  a  similar 
respect  for  it,  perhaps  based  also  on  the  grounds  of  experience,  for  he  says 
"  Realgar  is  strongly  corrosive,  dangerous  and  poisonous  "  (Ed.  Nicaise, p.  850). 
86/22.  The  translator  has  left  out  a  most  interesting  case  which  reads 
as  if  the  patient  had  Actinomycosis.  Digby  MS.  161,  leaf  18,  gives  these 
details,  the  translation  is  mine.  "A  certain  man,  however,  at  Bridgeford- on-Trent,  in  the  county  of  Nottingham,  had  a  bad  ulcer  upon  the  back  of  his 
hand,  and  there  were  grains  in  it  like  barleycorns  full  of  blood,  and  if  the 
hand  was  compressed  by  the  fingers  a  satlious  and  stinking  discharge  was 
driven  out  with  itching  and  sometimes  with  pain."  The  patient  was completely  cured  after  realgar  and  soap  had  been  applied. 
The  text  runs  : — "Quidam  homo  tamen  in  Briggeforde  super  Trent  in 
Comitatu  Notyngham',  habuit  serpiginem  granosam  super  tergum  manus et  grana  erant  similia  granis  ordei  plena  sanguine  et  si  manus  cum  digitis 
compressa  sanies  sub  granis  erumpebat  cum  fetore  pruritu  et  aliquando  cum dolore. 
"  Quando  vero  post  multa  medicamina  recepta  cum  pulvere  realgar'  et sapone  nigro  commixtum  totum  herpetem  predictum  bene  liniui  et  fmniter 
applicaui.  Paciens  vero  ingentem  dolorem  per  diem  naturalem  perpessus 
est,  et  manus  nimis  erat  inflatus  pre  dolore  et  calore.  Quo  viso,  super- posui  vitellum  oui  crudum  cum  oleo  rosarum,  et  manum  bene  cum  dicto 
oleo  permixi  tandem  incepit  fieri  diuisio  circa  extremitates  ulceris  et 
medicina  predicta  nihil  nocuerat  sano  corio  sed  tantummodo  quod  infectum fuerat  mortificauit.  Continuato  vero  medicamine  de  vitello  et  oleo  rosarum 
tota  ilia  pellis  dicte  manus  infecta,  bene  est  emulsa  et  omnino  separata 
sine  neruorum  aut  venarum  lesione.  Qua  vero  reparata  vulnus  cum  vitello 
oui  crudo  et  cum  melle  rosarum  mixto  et  alfita  subtilicia  cum  stupis  lini 
delicatis  inter  ossa  et  emplastrum  apposit'. 
"  Emplastrum  jamdictum  super  stupas  lini  mundas  extensum  supraposui et  cum  hac  sola  cura  peroptime  pacientem  curaui  sine  mutilacione  neru- 
orum aut  venarum.  Post  consolidacionem  vulneris  supraposui  emplastrum 
de  diaquilo  resoluto  cum  unguento  maluarum  et  lilii  et  supposui  longo 
tempore  donee  pellis  noua  fuerat  bene  digesta  et  ne  reciperet  alteracionem 
a  ae're  vel  alio  casu  contingente." 
87/25.  These  rules  show  the  excellence  of  Arderne's  practice.  The simplest  dressings  were  only  renewed  when  it  was  necessary.  He  was  in 
every  way  an  opponent  of  meddlesome  surgery,  and  thus  takes  a  very 
high  place,  not  only  amongst  his  contemporaries,  but  amongst  all  surgeons. 
88/9.  And  yet  almost  immediately  he  shows  the  lack  of  critical  faculty 
which  characterizes  so  many  mediaeval  writers.  The  superstition  about 
the  harmfulness  of  a  menstruating  woman  is  well  known  to  all  students  of 
folk-medicine.  The  question  ia  still  raised  in  all  seriousness  from  time 
to  time  both  in  lay  and  medical  papers. 
89/7.  -PwZiv  sanguinis  veneris.  The  use  of  human  blood  was  no  new 
thing.  Dr.  J.  F.  Payne  has  an  interesting  article  on  the  subject,  "Arnold 
de  Villa  Nova  on  the  therapeutic  use  of  human  blood"  (Janus,  1903, pp.  432  and  477).  Jamerius  (cf.  55/3-  p.  123)  used  a  powder  which  he  called 
"  human  powder,"  many  years  before  Arderne, "  against  all  wounds."  The 
formula  ran,  "  I&.  Symphyti ;  balaustie,  rosarum,  squinanti,  masticis  olibani ana  Jij  :  aluminis,  arilli  uvarum  ana  5j,  atramenti,  sanguinis  draconis 


Notes.     Page  89,  line  14  to  pafje  100,  line  15.         133 
ana  3«s  :  galbani  5ij :  galle  asiane  5j  :  culofonie,  boli  armenici  ana  5'j : 
sanguinis  humani  gvi.  Effunde  super  pellem  arietis  et  siccati  et  ejusdem 
pellis  arietine  combuste  et  pulverijate  5nj  "  [rubric  xxxvii]. 
89/14.  Alkanet  is  the  root  of  Anchusa  tinctoria.  It  was  formerly  used 
as  an  astringent,  but  is  now  only  used  as  a  colouring  material. 
89/30.  A  holloio  ulcer  or  ulcus  concavum  is  the  same  thing,  says  Henri 
de  Mondeville  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  425),  as  a  deep  or  hidden  ulcer.  It  is  any 
ulcer  whose  whole  extent  is  not  visible.  It  is  often  called  by  "  les  ydiotes 
cirurgiens,"  or  "cyrurgici  rurales,"  a  fistula,  but  it  differs  from  a  true fistula  both  in  treatment  and  results. 
90/23.  The  gloss  on  edere  terrestris  is  useful  to  identify  the  plant  as  the 
ground-ivy,  Hedera  helix,  because  the  term  hedera  terrestris  was  also 
applied  to  the  Yew,  Taxus  baccata — called  in  Mid.  Latin  ivius.  Dr.  Prior 
(op.  cit.,  p.  261)  gives  a  most  interesting  account  of  the  chain  of  blunders 
which  led  to  the  confusion  between  a  creeping  form  of  Hedera  and  a  full- grown  evergreen  shrub. 
91/9.  Wildfire  is  a  synonym  for  erysipelas.  Cf.  41/i.  The  Persian 
fire  was  sometimes  shingles  (or  herpes  zoster)  :  sometimes  a  carbuncle. 
St.  Anthony's  fire  meant  erysipelas  in  some  cases,  ergotinism  or  endemic gangrene  in  others. 
91/24.  Pater  noster  atid  Ave  maria.  On  this  method  of  estimating 
small  portions  of  time  see  Forewords,  p.  xxix. 
94/35.  O\irse$  of  humours  is  the  flowing  of  a  discharge,  just  as  we  still 
speak  of  menstruation  in  a  woman  as  "the  courses." 
95/14.  Abhominaciones  of  the  stomach.  This  is  a  good  example  of 
the  early  spelling  of  abomination,  due,  says  The  New  English  Dictionary, 
"To  an  assumed  derivation  from  ofe  homine,  away  from  man,  inhuman, 
beastly."  It  really  comes  from  ab  and  omen.  The  word  is  genuinely expressive  of  the  conditions  in  gastric  catarrh. 
97/5-  Walwort  is  the  dwarf-elder,  Sambucus  ebulus. 
97/9.  Plinius  is  Pliny  the  Younger  whose  "  Natural  History  "  is  still 
good  reading  whether  in  the  original  or  in  Philemon  Holland's  translation. Dioscorides  is  Dioscorides  Pedacius  who  lived  in  the  time  of  Nero  and 
Vespasian,  and  was  celebrated  as  the  great  classical  botanist  and  phar- 
macologist. His  great  work,  "  irtpl  v\tjs  iarpj/cfjj,"  appeared  in  five  books. 
Macrobius  is  quoted  also  by  Guy  de  Chauliac  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  12),  and  by 
Gilbertus  Anglicus.  Macrobius  died  415  A.D.  He  wrote  "  Saturnalia,"  con- taining miscellaneous  remarks  on  physics,  antiquities,  literary  criticism,  etc. 
98/6.  Anthraxis  considered  both  by  Salicet  and  by  de  Chauliac.  Salicet 
(Ed.  Pifteau,  p.  176)  says  that  anthrax  and  carbuncle  are  the  same,  except 
that  anthrax  is  the  more  malignant  and  acute.  It  was  called  "  Bonne 
Bube,"  says  Guy  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  100),  "  in  the  opposite  sense  because  it  is 
very  wicked  and  very  dangerous,"  just  as  we  call  the  fairies  "good  folk" or  say  of  a  baby  "  how  ugly  he  is." 
100/15.  The  gymetve^.  The  New  English  Dictionary  gives  this  word  as 
a  variant  of  gemew  or  gemow,  the  plural  of  gemel,  twins  ;  and  of  a  door 
double.  It  gives  as  a  quotation  1523,  in  Kirkpatrick,  "Itelig.  Ord. 
Norwich"  (1848)  170,  "Within  the  White  Freris,  in  Norwich,  at  the 
Jemowe  door."  It  would  be  interesting  to  know  whether  the  gymewej  or Jemowe  door  was  peculiar  to  the  Carmelite?. 
Frere  Carome].  It  is  clear  from  the  Latin  text  that  the  Frere  Carorne^ were  the  Carmelites  or  White  Friars  who  had  their  convent  and  church 


134         Notes.     Page  100,  line  33  to  page  102,  line  3. 
east  of  the  Temple  in  London.  The  Carmelite  Convent  was  founded  by 
Sir  Richard  Gray  in  1241,  upon  ground  given  by  Edward  I.  In  1350 
Courtenay,  Earl  of  Devon,  rebuilt  the  Whitefriars  church,  and  in  1420 
Robert  Marshall,  Bishop  of  Hereford,  added  a  steeple.  At  the  Dissolution 
Dr.  Butts  was  given  the  Chapter  house  as  a  residence.  The  church  was 
pulled  down  in  the  reign  of  Edward  VI,  but  the  refectory  of  the  convent 
remained  as  the  Whitefriars  theatre.  The  right  of  sanctuary  remained 
for  many  years,  as  is  known  to  every  reader  of  Scott's  novels.  The  Library at  Lambeth  Palace  contains  a  will  (Staff.  2,  p.  548,  Will  91)  dated  Feb.  1, 
1446,  and  proved  May  12, 1449.  The  will  is  made  by  John  Arderne,  aruiiger, 
who  desires  to  be  buried  by  Margaret  his  wife,  if  dying  in  London,  or  by 
Elizabeth  his  wife,  if  dying  at  Leygh.  "  His  body,"  the  document  states, 
"  is  actually  buried  in  the  Carmelite  church  under  the  marble  tomb  with 
Margaret."  The  will  is  dated  at  St.  Margaret's,  Westminster,  and  leaves his  effects  to  John,  his  son,  and  Bridget,  his  daughter. 
100/33.  1°  1376,  about  the  time  Arderne  was  writing  this  treatise,  the 
Commons  petitioned  the  king  "that  Ribalds  .  .  .  and  sturdy  Beggars 
may  be  banished  out  of  every  town"  (Ribton  Turner,  "Vagrants  and 
Vagrancy,"  p.  52). A  truant  was  any  vagabond,  beggar  or  rogue. 
100/35.  Jii&quiamus  is  henbane,  Hyoscyamus  niger  or  alba. 
100/36.  Dannie  is  the  cockle  or  tares  which  the  wicked  man  sowed 
(Matt.  xiii.  25).  Darnel  was  a  general  name  for  all  kinds  of  cornfield  weeds, 
says  Dr.  Prior  (op.  cit.  64). 
Chessede  is  chess-seed,  chesses  being  a  name  applied  to  the  poppy- chasses  and  chese  boules,  from  the  shape  of  its  capsule. 
Briony  root  was  looked  upon  as  a  powerful  hydrogogue  purging 
agent,  whilst  the  juice  of  the  plant  was  a  remedy  for  gout. 
The  ribald's  potion  would  not  have  done  much  harm  even  in  con- siderable doses. 
lOl/io.  Cicuta  is  water  hemlock,  the  Cicuta  virosa. 
101/12.  Opium  is  a  tear  which  flows  from  the  wounded  heads  or  leaves 
of  the  black  poppy,  being  ripe.  Some  promiscuously  use  it  with  Mecoriium, 
but  they  do  ill  ;  for  opium  is  a  drop  or  tear,  Meconium  the  gross  expressed 
juice  from  the  whole  plant.  However,  they  are  both  of  one  quality :  opium 
is  the  finer  gum  and  the  stronger,  Meconium  is  the  coarser  and  weaker,  yet the  more  malign. 
"  Opium  is  three-fold.  1.  Black  and  hard,  from  Syria  and  Aden. 2.  Yellower  and  softer,  from  Cambaia.  3.  White,  from  Cairo  or  Thebes, 
which  last,  commonly  called  Thebian  opium,  is  the  best,  being  heavy, 
thick,  strong-scented  like  Poppy,  bitter  and  sharp,  inflammable,  almost  of the  colour  of  Aloes,  and  easie  to  dissolve  in  water.  The  counterfeit 
when  washed  colours  the  water  like  saffron."  (Salmon's  "New  London 
Dispensatory,"  1678,  p.  167,  col.  2.) 
101/i6.  Propoleos  is  bee  bread.  Henri  de  Mondeville  in  his  <;  Anti- 
dotaire  "  (Ed.  Nicaise,  p.  831)  says  :  "85.  Cera,  en  grec  Propolis,  en  Arabe 
Scham'a  (Scliamha) :  elle  tient  le  milieu  entre  les  quatre  qualites." 
102/3.  Castor  was  long  looked  upon  as  "  a  most  noble  Drug  of  great 
use  in  all  distempers  of  the  head."  It  is  the  secretion  from  the  cloacal glands  of  the  castor  fiber  obtained  from  the  Hudson  Bay  territory.  Its 
properties  have  hardly  yet  been  adequately  tested,  and  it  is  possible  that 
it  may  regain  some  of  its  former  prestige. 


Notes.     Page  102,  line  8  to  page  104,  line  8.         135 
102/8.  The  nux  moschata  or  myristica  is  the  nutmeg,  which  was  looked 
upon  as  a  comforter  of  the  head  and  stomach.  Mace,  which  is  the  arillus 
of  the  fruit  dried  in  the  sun,  has  similar  properties. 
102/8.  Nenufare  is  the  water-lily  used  in  medicine  as  an  oil,  syrup  and water.  The  lily  with  yellow  flowers  stoppeth  the  Jask  and  bloody  flux,  but 
the  white-flowered  lily  is  the  strongest,  and  is  powerful  in  stopping  the 
Whites,  drunk  in  red  wine. 
Mirtellei  is  the  Rubus  hortensis,  the  garden  bramble  or  dwarf  myrtle 
bush.  The  leaves  astringe  and  stop  fluxes ;  the  fruit  and  berries  bind,  cool 
in  fevers,  quench  thirst,  stop  vomitings. 
102/8.  The  Manuscript  stops  here  abruptly,  but  I  have  copied  the 
charm  from  another  source,  partly  on  account  of  its  intrinsic  interest, 
partly  because  of  the  sidelight  it  sheds  on  the  Duke  of  Clarence's  wedding 
festivities  and  of  Arderne's  desire  for  secrecy. 
104/5.  ^n  some  of  the  later  manuscripts  the  words  Enthe  and  Enthanay 
have  become  Gnthe  and  Gnthenay. 
104/8.  Fflffrwm  carofactum  eat  were  words  of  power  in  the  middle  ages. 
Friar  Odoric  of  Pordenone,  who  was  in  Northern  China  about  1320  when  the 
Yang-tsi  floods  caused  the  devastation  which  some  think  started  the 
Black  Death,  says  ("  Yule,  Cathay  and  the  way  thither,"  Hakluyt  Soc.  1, 156, 
quoted  in  Creighton's  "  History  of  Epidemics,"  I,  155):  "  I  saw  such  num- bers of  corpses  as  no  one  without  seeing  it  could  deem  credible.  And  at 
one  side  of  the  valley,  in  the  very  rock,  I  beheld  as  it  were  the  face  of  a 
man  very  great  and  terrible,  so  very  terrible  indeed  that  for  my  exceeding 
.  great  fear  my  spirit  seemed  to  die  in  me.  Wherefore  I  made  the  sign  of 
the  Cross,  and  began  continually  to  repeat  verbum  caro  factum,  but  I  dared 
not  at  all  come  nigh  that  face,  but  kept  seven  or  eight  paces  from  it." 




INDEX. 
ABDOMINAL  massage  after  a  clyster, 
77,  131 
Abscess,  ischio-rectal,  11,  13 
Abscess,  mammary,  a  plaster  for,  12 
Acacia  for  piles,  63,  67 
Actinomycosis,  Arderne's   case    of. 132 
Acupressure  to  stop   bleeding,  66, 128 
Acus  rostrata,  the  snouted  needle, 
xvii,  15,  23,  33,  112 
Acute  disease,  21 
.<Egidius   Corboliensis,  account   of, 124 
JEgidius  Corboliensis  is  quoted,  59 
Ague  quartan,  piles  a  preservative 
from,  57 
Albania,   persistence   of    medieval 
methods  in,  114 
Albucasis,  treatment  of  fistula  by, 
xvi,  xvii,  112,  123 
Alge9iras,  siege  of,  xi,  108 
Alkaner,  89,  90,  133 
Alkenemistrej,  83 
Allbutt,  Sir  Clifford,  quoted,  123 
Alleluia,  or  woodsour,  68,  129 
Alleyne,  Dr.,  quoted,  xxxi,  118,  121 
Almonds,  oil  of,  to  prepare,  95 
Almonds,  water  of,  to  prepare,  95 
Aloea,  65  ;  bad  for  piles,  63 
Aloes  hepaticus,  a  styptic,  25,  27,  65 
Aloes  internally,  open  veins,  67 
Aloes  locally  a  styptic,  67 
Aloes,  the  varieties  of,  116 
Alphice,  or  barley-meal,  92 
Alphita,  66 
Alum,  46,  49,  116 
Alum  combust,  73,  81 
Alum  glass,  54, 81, 116;  preparation 
of,  82 
Alum  plume,  54,  88 
Alum  powder,  67 
Alum  Ro.,  116 
Alum  scissum,  81 
Alum  water,  preparation  of,  82 
Alum,  varieties  of,  116 
Alum  3iicarine,  burnt,  35,  40,  65,  86 
Alum  ^iicarine,  combust,  27,  35,  40 
Alum  3ucaryne,  54,  65,  81 
Amenorrhcea,  the  urine  in,  60 
Anaesthesia,  an  ointment,  to  procure, 101 
Anathemasy,  piles  due  to,  58 
Anence,  meaning  of  the  word,  123 
Ani  pruritus,  73 
Ankles,  fistula?  of,  46,  47 
Anteros,  or  Rose  threads,  67,  128 
Anthrace,  treatment  of,  52,  98 
Anthrax,  meaning  of  the  term,  123 
Anthrax,  treatment  of,  52,  98 
Antioch,  drink  of,  44,  47 
Antioch,  formula  for  the  drink  of, 120 
Antioch,  the  hiera  of,  120 
Antioch,  the  treacle  of,  120 
Antwerp,  Arderne  practises  at,  xii, 
108,  117 
Anyse,  63 
Apii  emplastron,  51 
Apii,  juice  of,  49,  50,  72 
Apium,  49,  50 
Aposteme,  112 
Aposteme  of  the  lure,  signs  of,  11 ; 
treatment  of,  13 
Apostemes,  fraudulent,  81 
Apostemes,  the  treatment  of  inward, 98 
Apostemes,  venomous,  81 
Apostles,  ointment  of  the,  130 
Apostolicon,  74,  79,  130 
Apothecaries  mentioned,  28,  117 
Apothecary,  Arderne's  recognition 
of,  117 
Appleton,  William  de,  xi Arabic  ointment,  92 
Archimathseus  of  Salerno,  111 
Arderne  acts  like  an  idiot,  84 
Arderne  and  abdominal  massage,  77, 131 
Arderne,  fees  charged  by,  6,  111 
Arderne   land   granted    to   a   John 
Arderne,  x,  105 137 


138 Index. 
Arderne  not  a  blood-letter,  62 Arderne  quotes  himself,  26 
Arderne,  John,  a  fishmonger,  x,  note 
Arderne,  John  de,  107 
Arderne,  John,  lived  in  Newark,  1 
Arderne,  John,  reasons  for  treating 
fistula,  3 
Arderne,  Master  John,  biography 
of,  x  ;  date  of  birth,  x  ;  as  a  sur- 
geon, xiv  •  operation  for  fistula, xvii  ;  treatise  on  the  fistula,  xv ; 
the  works  of,  xv 
Arderne,  Richard,  a  skinner,  x,  note 
Arderne,  Sir  John,  x 
Arderne,  will  of  a  John,  in  1446, 134 
Arderne's  belief  in  Astrology,  115 
Arderne's  clyster  pipe,  74 
Arderne's  experience  with  arsenic, 83-85 
Arderne's  knowledge  of  books,  122 
Arderne's  knowledge  of  Galen,  110 
Arderne's  tapsivalencia  ointment,  69 
Arderne's  treatment  of  scabies,  111 
Arderne's  valence  of  scabious,  97 
Arderne's  valence  of  wormode,  98 Argentin,  Dr.,  quotes  Arderne,  xxx 
Arm,  a  case  of  swollen,  49 
Arm,  the  liver  vein  of,  54 
Arm,  vena  hepatica  of,  49 
Annitage-Sinith,  Mr.  Sydney,  quoted, 
x,  xi,  xiv,  108 
Arms  of  Bergerac,  108 
Arms  of  the  Everyngham  family, 107 
Arnold  de  Villa  Nova,  quoted,  132 
Arrow  wounds,  89,'  98 Arsenic,  44,  45,  50,  51 
Arsenic  a  dangerous  dressing,  83, 85 
Arsenic,  Arderne's  experience  with, 83 
Arsenic,  remedial  effects  on  the 
tissues,  44,  45 
Arsenic,  sublimed,  83 
Arsenic,  varieties  of,  82,  132 
Astrology,  Arderne's  belief  in,  115 Astrology  in  surgery,  16,  17 
Astronomers  quoted,  16,  17 
Atramentej,  53,  79,  128 Atreos  piles,  56 
Attrament,  40,  80 
Attramentum,  or  Black  ink,  128;  or 
vitriol,  119 
Attritos  piles,  56 
Auripigmentum,  46,  47,  49,  50   86 
Auripigmentum,  its  relation  to  ar- senic, 82 
Auripigmentum,  or  native  arsenic, 121 
Auripigmentum,  qualities  of,  83 
Auripigmentum  rubrum,  83 
Auripigmentum,  uses  of,  83 
Avance,  or  Herb  Benedict,  30,  117 
Avicenna,  account  of,  124 
Avicenna  quoted,  3,  56,  78 
Avicenna,  the  Canon  of,  115 
Avicenna,  white  ointment  of,  119 
Aysel,  or  vinegar,  119 
BALAUSTIA,   or  wild  pomegranate, 
65,  74,  127 Balne   by  Snaithe,    1  ;    hamlet   of, 108 
Bandages  after  fistula  operation,  25 
for  piles,  70 
Bandages,  list,  25 
Bandaging   a   patient   after  fistula 
operation,  25 
Bandaging,  the  advantages  of  good, 25 
Barber,  bad  treatment  by  a,  100 
Barber,  duties  of,  60,  125 
Barber  surgeons,  xix 
Barbers  not  to  be  taught  to  detri- ment of  Masters  in  surgery,  71 Barberry,  74 
Bark  dust,  74 
Barley  bread  soaked,  for  piles,  63 
Barley  meal,  27,  41,  66,  92 
Barone,  Roger  de,  account  of,  123 
Bartholomew  of  Salernum,  account 
of,  123 Bartholomew  of  Salernum,  Maister, 
quoted,  55,  123 Basilic  vein,  126;    phlebotomy  of, 
61,72 Bath,  hot,  treatment  by,  72 
Bawn,  Roger,  quoted,  55,  122 
Bdellium,  or  Myrrh,  67,  128 
Bean  as  a  styptic  applied  locally,  66 Bean  meal,  27 
Beans,  63 
Bedington  known  to  Arderne,  xxx 
Belleric  myrobohms,  126 
Bergerac,  arms  of,  108 
Bergerac,  town  of,  108 Bernard  de  Gordon  quoted,  14,  38, 
55.  56  note,  60,  64,  73,  114,  125 
Bernard  of  Gordon,  account  of,  122 Bible  quoted,  7 


lex. 
Bibliography,  xxxiii-xxxv 
Black  choler,  62 
Black  Death,  109 
Black  entrete,  53 
Black  ointment,  its  composition,  54 
Black  pepper,  92 
Black  pitch  plaster,  81 
Black  poppy,  100,  101 
Black  Prince,  Edward  the,  xii,  xxvii, 
2,  3,  130 
Black  soap,  48,  50,  118 
Bladder  for  clyster,  26 
Bladder  for  enema,  its  preparation, 75 
Blakborne,  Sir  Henry,  109 ;   cured 
of  fistula,  2 
Blanche,  wife  of  John  of  Gaunt,  107 
Bleeding,  Arderne's  method  of  ar- resting, 116 
Bleeding  from  the  basilic  vein,  54 
Bleeding-iron  inferior  to  a  lancet,  61 
Bleeding,  the  influence  of  the  Moon 
on,  16,  17 
Bleeding,  the  times  for,  61 
Bloodr  excess  of,  a  cause  of  piles, 56 
Blood,  how  purified,  57 
Blood-iron,  or  phlebotome,  61,  70 
Blood-letter,  a,  62 
Blood-letting-   not    undertaken    by 
Arderne,  62 
Blood,  means  of  staunching,  24 
Blood,  medicinal  use  of  human,  132 
Blood,  the,  runs  freely,  60 
Blood,  to  staunch,  24,  25,  65,  66 
Blood,  when  to  draw  maiden's,  90 
Boar's  dung,  66 Boetius,  7,  23,  111 
Bole,  armoniac,  27,  28,  36,  38,  40, 
63,  65,  67 
Bole  powder,  a  styptic,  25 
Boli,  meaning  of,  116. 
Bolus  armeniacus,  a  styptic,  116 
Bone,  dead,  treatment  of,  43,  54 
Bone,  mortification  of,  54 
Bones,  fistula  of,  evil  signs  in,  46, 47 
Books,  Arderne's  knowledge  of,  122 Bordeaux,  41,  108 
Brain,  remedies  to  comfort,  102 
Bran  decoction  for  a  clyster,  38,  49, 
69,  75,  76,  77 
Bran  ointment,  88 
Bread,  barley,  for  piles,  63 
Breast,  inflammation  of,  12,  52 
Briggerac,  town  of,  1,  108 
Brimstone  and  soap  ointment,  44, 46 
Briony  root,  100;  medicinal  uses  of, 134 
Brijwell  near  Tickhill,  2 
Broom  ashes,  53 
Bruised  leg,  treatment  of,  54,  98 
Bruising  of  limbs,  97 
Bruno  mentioned,  119 
Bubo,  nature  of,  37 
Bubo,  pun  upon  the  word,  36,  37 
Bubo  within  the  lure  incurable,  37, 
39 
Buboes  and  owls,  36,  37 
Burns,  treatment  of,  91 
Bursa  pastoris  or  Shepherd's  Purse, 63,  74,  78,  125 Butter,  30 
Buttocks,  bandaging  of,  25,  26,  70 
Buttocks,  ulceration  of,  39,  41 
Bujt,  meaning  of  the  word,  120 
Bujt  of  arm,  swelling  of,  49 
Bujt  of  knee,  emposteme  in,  47 
CALCOTHAR,   meaning  of  the  term, 131 
Calx  vive,  47,  48 
Camomile,  flowers  of,  94 
Camomile  for  a  clyster,  75,  76 
Camomile,  oil  of,  12,  26,  88 
Camomile,  oil  of,  to  prepare,  94 
Camphor  for  piles,  63 
Cancer    and   dysentery  differential 
signs,  37 Cancer  of  mouth,  86 
Cancer  of  rectum  to  be  distinguished 
from  dysentery,  39 
Cancer  of  the   rectum,  signs,   38; 
treatment,  38 ;  incurable,  39 
Cancer  of  the  yard,  92 
Cancer,  treatment  by  licium,  81,  85 
Cancerous  ulcers,  81,  86 
Canell  or  cinnamon,  63,  64,  127 
Canella,  a  styptic,  64 
Canon,  the  case  of  a,  52 
Caprifoile,  juice  of,  44,  81,  85 
Carbuncle,  the  medicinal  use  of,  128 
Carbuncle,  treatment  of,  52 
Carbuncles,  81 
Carleton,  Notts.,  107 
Carmelites,  the  church  of  the,  133 
Carmen,  contra  spasmum  et  crampe, 102 
Carome}  friars,  100 


140 Index. 
Carp,  49,  50,  51 
Cassia  fistula,  a  bridle  to  opium,  101 
Cassia  fistula  for  a  clyster,  75 
Castile,  king  of,  xi 
Castor,  its  source,  134 
Castoreum,  102 
Cato  quoted,  8 
Caule3,  croppej  of,  73 
Cautery  as  a  styptic,  66 
Cautery  used,  45,  46,  51 
Celidone,  juice  of,  40,  41,  73 
Celidone,  or  the  chelidonia  majus, 
90,  119 
Centilegium  of  Ptolemy.  115 
Ceraseos,  130 
Cerebral  symptoms  in  fistula,  14 
Ceruse,  or  carbonate  of  lead,  11,  27, 
65,  113,  117 
Chafing  of  skin,  treatment  of,  40 
Chalcanthum,  meaning  of  the  term, 
128,  131 
Chapped  lips,  an  ointment  for,  97 
Charm  against  cramp,  102 
Chauliac,  Guy  de,  55,  122,  123; 
classification  of  medical  practi- 
tioners by,  119;  formula  for  Ungt. 
Apostolicon,  130;  classification 
of  ulcers  by,  131 ;  quotes  William 
of  Salicet,  125;  treatment  of 
fistula  by,  xvii ;  use  of  ink  by, 128 
Chawelle},  the,  11,  113 
Chawylbone,  113 
Chessede,  or  chess-seed,  100,  134 
Chesterfield,  103 
Children,  to  cure  pustules  in  the 
mouths  of,  32 
Choler,  62 
Christmas  Day,  a  man  whose  leg 
swelled  on,  52 
Chronic  disease,  21 
ChynnyngJ  of  the  lure,  73 
Cicatrization  of  a  wound,  27 
Cicuta  or  water  hemlock,  101,  134 
"  Ciliaoa  passio,"  58 Cimbalarie,  or  pennywort,  130 
Cineris  geneste,  53 
Cinnamon,  68 
Cinquefoil  for  piles,  63 
Cipresse,  63 
Citonior,  oil  of,  41 
Citrine  ointment,  65 
Citrine3,  62,  125 
Clarence,  rnarringe  of  Lionel  Duke 
of,  xxix,  102,  103 
"Clariticatio     de      vicio      splenis," 
Gordon's,  quoted,  60 
Clay  and  horsednng  as  a  cement,  80, 
96 
Clay  used  as  a  styptic,  66 
Clothing,  the  manner  of  a  leech's,  6 Clowes,  William,  xiv 
Clyffyng,  meaning  of  the  word,  127 
Clyster,    26  ;     abdominal    massage after,  77 
Clyster,    administration     of,    needs skill,  76 
Clyster,  amount  to  be  given,  76 
Clyster,  components  of  a  simple,  75 
Clyster,   date   of   the  Treatise   on, xii 
Clyster,  for  fistula,  11  ;  formula  for, 76 
Clyster,  how  to  examine  the  results 
of,  77 
Clyster,  leech  to  be   skilled  in  ad- ministering, 75 
Clyster,  Lombards  skilled  in  giving, 
76 Clyster,  method  of  administering,  76 
Clyster,  mitigative,  65 
Clyster  of  bran,  38 
Clyster  pipe,  Arderne's  form  of,  74 Clyster  relieves  ventosenej,  78 
Clysters  for  piles,  65 
Clysters,  nutrient,  78 
Clysters  periodic,  78 
Clysters,  prognosis  from,  77 
Clysters,  a  treatise  on,  74-78 Cluttered  or  clotted  blood,  71 
Coclear,  the  shield,  xviii,  24,  112 
Codde,  fistula  of,  32 
Coddes    of   the    testicles,    cure    of fistula  in,  2 
Colace  or  cabbage,  70,  129 
Cold  a  styptic,  66 
Cole}  for  piles,  63 
Colica  passio,  a  clyster  for,  75,  78 
Colic  may  come  from  tenesmus,  72 
Colic  relieved  by  clysters,  76 
Colier,  John,  case  of,  32 
Colier,  John  le,  109 
Colocynth  pulp  a  cause  of  tenesmus, 72 
Colyar,  William,  109 
Colyn,  John,  cured,  2 Comfrey,  74 
Comyn,  derivation  and  use  of,  128 
Concave  ulcer,  133 
Condyloma.  68  ;  etymology  of,  56 


Index. 141 
Confection  of  Tapsimel,  31,  40 
Confectio  sanguinis  veneris,  90 
Connaught,  grant  of  land  in,  x,  105 
Constantinus  Africanus,  110,  123 
Constellations,  influence  of,   on  the 
body,  16,  17 
Constipation  a  cause  of  tenesmus,  72 
Constipation  relieved  by  clysters,  76 
Contents,  Table  of,  xxxvi-xxxvii 
Contusions,  treatment  of,  52 
Coprose,  or  green  vitriol,  53,  64,  79, 127 
Coral  for  piles,  a  styptic,  64 
Coral,  red,  66, 67 ;  the  medicinal  use 
of,  127 
Corbeil,  Giles  of,  account  of,  124 
Corboliensis  j3£gidius,  59,  113  ;  the 
treatise  of,  xiii  ;  account  of,  124 
Coriander  for  piles,  63 
Coriander  juice,  74 
Corrosive  powders,  rule  for  using,  87 
Cotton,  teazed,  25,  67 
Covetousness,  warning  against,  21 
Cramp,  charm  against,  102 
Crayfish,  41 
Creoferoboron  powder,  42,  44,  45,  46 
Creoferoboron,  powder,  not  identi- fied, 119 
Crete,  vitriol  is  found  in  the  isle  of,  17 
Crevise,  the  lobster,  41 
Crocus,  a  bridle  to  opium,  101 
Crocus  oil,  68 
Crocus,  or  saffron,  69,  101,  129 
Croydon  known  to  Arderne,  xxx 
Cuckoo's  bread,  or  wood  sorrel,  129 Cummin,  97  ;  bad  for  piles,  63 
Cummin,  externally  a  styptic,  67 ; 
internally  opens  veins,  67 
Cummin,  powder  of,  67 
Cupping  for  haemorrhoids,  62 
Cupping  with  scarification,  66 
Cure  of  fistula,  21 
Cure,  time  of,  in  fistula  of  fingers,  42 
Curse}  of  humours,  42, 93,  94 ;  mean- 
ing of  the  term,  133 
DAMASCENE,  JOHN,  an  alias  of  Sera- 
pion,  124 ;  quoted,  55  ;  his  oint- ment, 80 
Danger  signals  in  bleeding  piles,  59 
Darnel,  100 
Dates  of  the  treatises,  xii 
Day,  method  of  reckoning,  100 
Dead  flesh,  44,  46,  53,  83,  87 
Deaf  piles,  56 
Death   of   patients    in    autumn    or harvest,  38 
De  disciplina  scholarium  quoted,  23, 111 
De  Eardene,  x 
'  De  ingenio '  of  Galen  quoted,  82 Dei  Gratia,  formula  for  the  Ungt, 
130 
Demetrius,  king  of  Persia,  67,  128 
Denny,  Hew,  fishmonger,  cured,  2 
Derby,  Henry,  Earl  of,  1,  107,  108 
Derlyng,  Hugo,  cured  of  fistula,  1 
Diabrosi,  piles  due  to,  58 
Diachylon  plaster,  12;  varieties  of, 113 
Diaflosmus,  confection   of,   31,   32, 
92;  explanation  of,  117 
Diagredium,  a  cause  of  tenesmus, 
72 ;  preparation  of,  129 Dialthsea,  12 
Diaquilon,  12;  varieties  of,  113 Diarrhoea,  62 
Diatritonpipereon,  130 
Diet  a  cause  of  piles,  57 
Diet  for  fistula,  21 
Dilating  forceps,  Arderne's,  35 Dioscorides,  97 ;  account  of,  133 
Disease,  influence  of  mind  on,  6,  7,  8 
Disease,  influence  of  sun  and  moon 
upon,  21 Disease,  when  acute  and  chronic,  21 
Distillation  of  juniper  oil,  96 
Dock,  red,  68 
Dominica  oratio,  103 
Doves'  dung,  uses  of,  50,  121 Dragagant,   or  tragacanth,  64,  79, 
126,  131 
Dragagante  is  different  from  Dra- 
gante,  79 Dragant,  79 ;    the   composition   of, 126 
Dragaunt  mucilage  for  piles,  64, 126 
Dragma,  a  talent,  3 
Dressing  of  wounds  not  to  be  too 
frequent,  87 
Dressings  after  fistula  operations,  25 
Drink  a  cause  of  piles,  59 
Dropsy  caused  by  piles,  57 
Dropsy,  piles  a  preservative  from,  57 
Dropsy,  treatment  of  cold,  97 
Dung  of  dove,  50,  121 
Dung  of  horse,  80 
Dung  of  swine,  medicinal   use  of, 128 
Dung  of  wild  boar,  66 


142 Index. 
Duration  of  the  cure  of  fistula,  29 
Dysentery,  37,  62 
Dysentery   and   cancer,  differential 
signs,  37,  39 
Dysentery  to  be  distinguished  from 
piles,  55 Dyuelyn  ointment,  53,  54 
EARS  discharging,  81 
Ears,  ulcers  of,  81 
Edere  terrestris,  or  ground  ivy,  133 
Edward,    Prince    of    Wale?,    men- tioned, xxvii,  2,  3 
Egg,  hard  roasted,  69 
Egg,  raw,  as  a  dressing,  26,  28,  29, 
51,  53,  66,  67,  72,  83,  96 
Egg,  white  of,  25,  31,  32,  50,  51,  53 
Egg,  yolk  of,  11,  26,  27,  28,  29,  30, 
31,  35,  36,  38,  40,  54,  65,  72,  83, 96 
Eiren,  white  of,  31,  32,  67 
Emeroydes  v.   haemorrhoids,  55   et seqq. 
Emplastron  apii,  5 1 
Emplastron  Nerbon,  42,  87 
Emplastron  sanguiboetes,  43,  44,  45, 
47,51 
Emplastron  sanguiboetes  not  identi- fied, 119 
Emplastrum  diaflosmus,  31,  32 
Emplastr.  vitriol,  81 
Emposteme  in  bu3t  of  knee,  47 
Emunctories  of  the  body,  11,  113 
Encaustum,  or  purple  ink,  128 
Endive  for  clyster,  72 
Enema,  26.     See  Clyster 
Enemata,  a  treatise  on,  74-78 
Epistaxis,  to  arrest,  80 
Epithimation,  meaning  of  the  term, 121 
Epithimation  of  a  wound,  52 
Erysipelas,  40 
Ethic  patients,  a  help  for,  95 
Euphorbium  bad  for  piles,  63 
Evening  the  proper  time  to  bleed, 61 
Everyngham,      Sir      Adam,     107; 
armorial  bearings  of,  108;  cured 
of  fistula,  1 
Excoriations  of  the  skin,  36,  40,  43, 90 
Experience  teaches,  38 
Experience,  value  of,  3 
Extractum  nigrum,  its  composition, 
53,  54 
Eyes,  cure  of,  85,  86 
Eyes,  treatment  by  licium,  85,  86 
FALCONERS  use  orpiment,  83 
False  flewme,  58 
Farmacie  is  medicine,  68 
Feathers,  burnt,  a  styptic,  25 
Feathers  of  fowl,  burnt,  66 
Feeding  by  the  rectum,  78 
Fees  for  an  operation,  6 
Fees  in  the  fourteenth  century,  111 
Fees,  Mondeville's  advice  about,  xx, 
xxii,  xxiii 
Fees  to  be  paid  before  an  operation, 15 
"Felon,"  meaning  of  the  term,  121 
"  Felon,"  treatment  of,  52 
Fenigreke,  72,  130 
Ferris,  Richard,  xiv 
Festered  gout,  21,  46,  47,  115 
Feu  sauvage,  4,  27,  41,  91 
Fics,  56";  the  French  name  for  piles, 55 
Fics-herbe,  67 
Fig,  a  bloody,  41 
Figs,  bleeding,  in  the  hand,  92 
Figs  cured,  92 
Figs  in  the  yard,  92 
Fik,  meaning  of  the  term,  119 
Fingers,  fistula  of,  42 
Fire,  analogy  of  the  working  of,  30 
Fire,  Persian,  or  shingles,  133 
Fire,  St.  Anthony's,  or  ergotinism, 133 
Fire,  wild,  or  erysipelas,  41,  91, 133 
Fishmonger,  treatment  of  a  London, 100 
Fistula,  blind  internal,  operation  for, 
34 Fistula,  causes  of,  11 
Fistula,  complete,  cure  of,  by  liga- ture, 34 
Fistula,  contemporary  treatment  of, xvi 
Fistula,  cure  of,  21 
Fistula  deemed  incurable,  xvi,  2,  4 
Fistula,  definition  of,  11,  20 
Fistula,  dressings  for,  25,  27,  34 
Fistula,  duration  of  the  cure  of,  29, 
33,36 
Fistula,  examination  of,  33 
Fistula,   good   signs   for  operating 
upon,  21 Fistula,  head  symptoms  in,  14 
Fistula  in  ano,  duration  of  cure,  6 


Index. 
143 
Fistulo  in  ano,  the  fees  for  operating 
upon,  6,  111 Fistula  in  ano.  instruments  for,  8,  9, 13 
Fistula  in  ano,  prognosis  of,  6 
Fistula  in  ano,  treatise  on,  1-49 
Fistula  in  men,  prognosis  of,  21 
Fistula,  influence  of  diet  on,  21 
Fistula,   length    of  time    for  cure, 34 
Fistula,  method  of  cutting,  23 
Fistula,  method  of  fretting,  29 
Fistula,  method  of  placing  the 
patient  for  operation  on,  34 
Fistula,  mortification  of,  35 
Fistula   neglected  by  the  old   sur- 
geons, xvi,  2 
Fistula  of  arm,  20;  bone,  47;  breast, 
20 ;  buttocks,  13 ;  coddes,  2,  32  ; 
costes,    20;    feet,    20,    21,    46; 
hands,  20 ;  joints,  20  ;  knees,  20; 
legs,    20,    21,     47;     metacarpal 
bones,  4,  6  ;  penile,   14 ;  scrotal, 
13 ;  thighs,  20 ;  urethra,  14 
Fistula  operation,  dressings  for,  25  ; 
opening  of  bowels  after,  26,  29 
Fistula,  sequelae  of,  14 
Fistula,  treatment  after  operation, 26 
Fistula,  treatment  by  cutting,  21 
Fistula,  treatment  by  licium,  85 
Fistula,  treatment  by  ligature,  29 
Fistula,  urethral,  21 
Fistula?,  multiple,  treatment  of,  32 
Fistulae,  situation  of,  20 
Fistulate  gout,  21,  27,  46,  47,  115 
Flanders  known  to  Arderne,  xii,  117 
Flanders,  name  of  nightshade  in,  xii, 
32,  117 
Flayings  of  the  skin,  36,  40,  43,  90 
Fleobotome,  47 
Flesh,  dead  or  mortified,  44,  46,  54, 
83,87 
Fleume,  scab  of  salt.  82 
Flosmus  in  mullein,  31 
Flowers  of  camomile,  94 
Flowers  of  pomegranate,  74 
Fomentation,  70 
Fools  and  no  true  leeches,  87 
Fools'  treatment  of  piles,  70 Forceps  for  dilating  anus,  35 
Forlong,  the  distance  of  a,  76 
"  For  why,"  the  English  rendering of  Nam,  4,  111 
Four  Masters,  account  of,  123 
Fowl's  grease,  12 
Fraenum  Ctesaris,  the  ligature,  xvii, 
9,22,  24,  112 France,  a  sleeping  powder  used  in, 100 
France,  pilgrims  robbed  in,  101 Frankincense,  40 
Fraudulent  apostemes,  81 
Fraudulent  ulcers,  79,  86,  131 
French  name  for  piles,  figs,  55 
French  soap,  118 
Frere  Carome^,  the  White  friars  or Carmelites,  133 
Fretting  a  fistula,  29,  39  ;  of  skin, 64 
Friar  minorite  cures  fistula,  3,  110 
Friars  preachers  cured  of  fistula,  2 
Frousingej,  13  ;  meaning  of,  114 
Fumitory,  juice  of,  63 
Fumitory,  water  of,  63 
Furfur,  or  Bran,  70,  129 
Furnivall,  Dr.,  quoted,  xxix 
GALANG,  or  ginger,  68,  129 
Galen,  Arderne's  knowledge  of,  110  ; quoted,  3,  12,  57,  60,  80,  94 
Galenic  writings  known  to  Arderne, 110 
Gall  bladder  the  prison  of  melan- choly, 60 
Galls,  63,  65,  67,  74 
Galls,  powder  of,  27 
Gariopontus  of  Salerno,  123 Garlic,  50 
Garlic  bad  for  piles,  63 
Garse,  meaning  of  the  word,  121 
Garsing  a  wound,  52,  55,  63 
Gascony,  1,  41 
Gascouy  campaign,  Arderne's  know- 
ledge of,  108  - Gaunt,  John  of,  x,  xi,  xiii,  107,  108 
Gaunt,  Blanche,  the  wife  of  John  of, 10 
Gawel  or  Myrrh,  74 
Gedelin,  Notts.,  107 
Geneste,  ashes  of,  53 
Gilbert  the  Englishman,  or  Gilbertus 
Anglicus,  113,  123 Gilbertus,  Maister,  73 
Gilbertyn,  quoted,  11,  55,  113 
Giles  of  Corbeil,  account  of,  124 
Gilles  de  Corbeil,  xiii,  113 
Ginger,  68 
Glass,  powder  of,  44,  54 
Glass,  use  of,  in  wounds,  44 


144 Index. 
Glister.  26,  27,  29 
Glutaeal  sinuses,  13 
Glysters,  a  treatise  on,  74 
Goats'  milk,  72  ;  artificial,  72 
Goats'    milk    a    good    vehicle    for myrobalans,  63 
Goats'  tallow,  73 Good  Henry  or  ChenopodSum,  130 
Goose  grease,  12 
Gordon,     Bernard     de,    114,    122  ; 
quoted,  59,  60,  61,  64,  83,  125 
Gout,  a  good  plaster  for,  96 
Gout,  festered,  21,  115 
Gout,  fistulate,  21,  46,  47 
Gout  of  the  joints,  97 
Gout,  treatment  of,  96,  97 
Gray,  Sir  Reginald  de,  2,  102,  109 
Gray,  Sir  Richard,  founds  a  Carme- 
lite convent  in  London,  134 
Grease  of  hens,  72 
Great  men,  licium  fails  to  cure,  86 
Great  men,  treatment  of,  25,  86,  89 
Great  wine,  63 
Greek,  charm  written  in  letters  of, 104 
Greek  physicians,  use  of  the  word 
haemorrhoids,  55 
Greek  powder,  41 
Green  ointment,  54 
Gruel  for  piles,  63 
Guido,  Master,  account  of,  123 
Guild  of  Surgeons,  xix 
Gum  arabic,  27 
Gum  arabic  for  piles,  64,  67 
Gums,  inflammatioji  of,  81 
Gums,  swollen,  81 
Gunnas,  a  family  of  York,  109 
Gunnay,  Thomas,  109 
Gunnays,  John,  109 
Gunny,  Thomas,  cured,  2 
Guy  de  Chauliac,  quoted  55,  122 ; 
account  of,  123  ;  use  of  ink  by,  128 
Gymewej,  the,  100  ;  meaning  of  the 
word,  133 
"  HACKBY-PACKRY,"  130 
Haematites,  or  lapis  omoptoes,  63, 126 
Haemorrhage,  means  of  stopping,  15, 
24,  116 
Haemorrhoids,  French  name  for,  55  ; 
Greek  name  for,  55 ;  Latin  name 
for,  55  ;  Londoners'  name  for,  55 Haemorrhoids,  a  cause  of  tenesmus, 
72 
Haemorrhoids,  a  treatise  on,  55 
Haemorrhoids,  attritos,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  causes  of,  56 
Haemorrhoids,     condition     of     the 
urine  in,  55 
Haemorrhoids,  condylomatous,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  danger  signals  in,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  deaf,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  definition  of,  57 
Haemorrhoids,  diet  in,  63 
Haemorrhoids,  dietetic  causes  of,  57 
Haemorrhoids,  diseases  caused  by,  57 
Haemorrhoids,    diseases    prevented 
by,  57 Haemorrhoids,  distinguishable  from 
dysentery,  58 
Haemorrhoids,  distinguishable  from 
passio  iliaca,  58 
Haemorrhoids,  drink  a  cause  of,  59 
Haemorrhoids,  due  to  anathemasy,  55 
Haemorrhoids,  due  to  diabrosi,  55 
Haemorrhoids,   due   to  melancholy, 
signs  of,  60 
Haemorrhoids,  due  to  rixi,  58 
Haemorrhoids,  etymology  of,  55 
Haemorrhoids,    excess    of    blood    a 
cause  of,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  means  of  stopping,  15, 
24 Haemorrhoids,  melancholy,  a  cause 
of,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  moralej,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  mulberry,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  ointment  for,  91 
Haemorrhoids,       operation       upon 
thrornbosed,  70 
Haemorrhoids,  phlebotomy  in,  61 
Haemorrhoids,  plethora  a  cause  of, 56 
Haemorrhoids,    prevented  by   phle- botomy, 62 
Haemorrhoids,  produced  by  bleeding 
from  internal  saphenous  vein,  61 
Haemorrhoids,      purgation     recom- mended in,  64 
Haemorrhoids,  purgatives  a  cause  of, 57 
Haemorrhoids,  purgatives  in,  62 
Haemorrhoids,  purse-like,  71 
Haemorrhoids,  remedies  for,  63 
Haemorrhoids,  restrained  by  bleeding 
from  external  saphenous  vein,  61 
Haemorrhoids,  scammony  and  aloes 
harmful  in,  63 
Haemorrhoids,  signs  of,  56 


Indesc. 145 
Haemorrhoids,  soothing  clyster  for, 65 
Haemorrhoids,  symptoms  of,  57 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  by  clysters, 
64,65 
Haemorrhoids,  treated  by  cupping,  62 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  by  rubbing, 
60,65 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  by  sweating 63 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  in  delicate 
folk,  64 
Haemorrhoids,     treatment     in     the 
luxurious,  60 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  in   strong 
men,  64,  95 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  of,  by  fools, 70 
Haemorrhoids,  treatment  of  inflamed, 
69,  70 
Haemorrhoids,  uses  of,  57 
Haemorrhoids,  or  uve,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  varieties  of,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  verucalej,  56 
Haemorrhoids,  when  excessive,  158 
Haemorrhoids,   when    temperate   in 
amount,  58 
Hairs  of  hare  as  a  styptic,  62,  66 
Hallelujah,  or  wood  sorrel,  68,  129 
Haly,  16,  17,  115 
Hameldon,  Sir  Thomas,  cured,  2 
Hand,  figs  of,  cured,  92 
Hare's  hairs  burnt,  25,  66,  67  ;  nojt burnt,  25,  67 
Hartshorn,  74 
Headache,  cure  for,  41 
Headache,  symptoms  in  fistula,  14 
Headache,  treatment  of,  94 
Heat,  a  styptic,  66 
Hedera    terrestris,    sometimes    the 
Yew,  90, 133 
Henry  IV  cured   of  prolapse,  xii, 
74,  130 
Henry,  Earl  of  Derby,  death  of,  107, 108 
Henry,  Good,  or  chenopodium,  130 
Hen's  feathers,  burnt,  a  styptic,  25, 66 
Hen's  grease,  72 Herb  pede  lyon,  48,  120 
Herb  Robert  or  geranium  robertia- 
num,  121 
Hermodactilej  powder,  81,  131 
Hiera    pigre,    explanation    of    the 
term,  130 
AUOERXE. 
Hig  (Hag)  taper,  117 Hippocrates   quoted,    21,   57,     70  ; 
Arderne's  knowledge  of,  115 Hippocratic     writings    known    to Arderne,  110 
Hog,  lard  of,  96 Holle,  John  of,  cured,  2 Hollow  ulcers,  89 
Homily  quoted,  7 
Honey,  44,  48,  49,  50,  65,  73,  75,  76, 
77,  81,  85,  92,  97 
Honey  cotted  with  vinegar,  65 
Honey  of  Mullein,  xxxii 
Honey  scorned,  30,  31,  40,  65,  73 
Honey,  use  of,  in  wounds,  44 Horse  dung,  80 
Horse-kicks,  injuries  from,  52,  54 Horsemint,  74 
Human  powder,  its  composition,  132 
Humours,  causes  of,  93,  94 
Humours,  the  varieties  of,  125 
Huntingdon,  102 
Hyoscyamus,  100,  101 
Hypoquistidos  for  piles,  63 
IDIOT,  Arderne  acts  like  an,  84 
Idiot  surgeons,  133 
lera  pigra,  130 
Iliaca  passio   to    be    distinguished 
from  piles,  58 
Iliac  passion,  meaning  of,  129 
Iliac  passion  the  result  of  tenesmus, 
72 Iliac  passion,  signs  of,  59 
Impatience  of  patients  commented 
on,  55 Incurable  wounds,  treatment  of,  96 
Indi  melancholy,  62 
Indi  myrobalans,  126 
Inflammation  a  cause  of  tenesmus,  72 
Ink  of  Lombards,  67 
Ink,  varieties  of,  128 
Intercutaneous  collections,  cure  of, 97 
Isaac  the  Jew,  110 
Isagoge  Johannitii,  123 
Itch,  treatment  of,  by  Arderne,  111 
Itching,  cure  of,  40 
JACEA  ALBA  is  scabious,  98 
Jacea  nigra  is  matfelon,  98 
Jamarcii,  Maister,  quoted,  55 
Jamarcius,  account  of,  123 
Jamerius,  quoted,  118  ;  account  of, 


146 Index. 
Jamerius'  human  powder,  132 Jasper,  red,  medicinal  use  of,  66, 127 
Joliannice,  account  of,  123 
Johannitius,  the  '  Isagoge'  of,  110  ; account  of,  123 
Joints,  gout  of,  97 
Joints  of  fingers,  fistula  of,  42 
Joyntour  of  the  fingers,  fistulas  of,  46 
Juice  of  apiuin,  50,  72 
Juice  of  caprifoile,  its  uses,  81,  85 
Juice  of  celidon,  73 
Juice  of  coriander,  74 
Juice  of  livane,  73 
Juice  of  marigold,  52 
Juice  of  Mercury  93 
Juice  of  mullein,  64,  67 
Juice  of  nettle  a  styptic,  66 
Juice  of  nettle,  the  medicinal  use  of 128 
Juice  of  orpyne,  67 
Juice  of  plantayne  for  piles,  64 
Juice  of  porres  (leeks),  45,  67 
Juice  of  rhubarb,  64 
Juice  of  scabious,  97 
Juice  of  solsequium,  52 
Juice  of  walwort,  uses  of,  97 
Juice  of  woodbine,  44 
Juniper  ointment,  96 
Jusquiamus,    juice    of,    100,    101  ; 
seed,  100 ;  treacle,  102 
Jusquiamus,  or  Henbane,  134 
Kanvaj  or  Canvas,  92 
Kebulij  fleume,  62 
Kebulij  myrobalans,  126 
Kilyuj  vein,  its  anatomy,  57 
Knee,  emposteme  in  the  bujt  of,  47 
Knees,  fistulas  of,  46 
Knife  wound,  to  stop  bleeding -from, 66 
Knife  wounds,  89,  98,  100 
Kynnyng,  meaning  of  the  word,  127 
LAOHE  knot,  29 
Ladanum,  63 
Ladies'  name  for  Pulvis  sanguinis veneris,  89 
Ladies,   the   leech    not    to   meddle with,  5 
Lady,  patient  treated  by,  44,  119 
Lady  treats  a  case  of  swollen  arm 49 
Laici,  103 
Lameleye,  Rich  de,  107 
Lampadidnawe  in  Wales,  107 
Lana  succida,  12,  67,  113,  114 
Lancaster,  Duke  of,  xi,  xiii,  xiv,  1 
Lanceola,  description  of,  116 
Lancet,  13,  15,  24,  32,  70,  71,  125 
Lancet   and    Razor,   difference    be- tween, 115 
Lancet  preferable  to  a  bleeding-iron, 
61 Lanfrank,  treatment  of  fistula  by, 
xvi ;  ideal  surgeon,  xxv  ;  quoted, 
,     54,  55,  56,  57,  119;  account  of, 122 
Laon,  king  of,  xi 
Lapis  omoptoes  for  piles,  63,  126 
Lard,  34,  45,  48,  50,  51,  54,  69,  77, 
84,  97,  98,  99,  101 
Lard,  shavings  of,  51 
Lard,  skin  of,  47,  69,  97,  98 
Lard  tents,  48 
Latin  use  of  the  term  haemorrhoids, 55 
Leech,  a  witty,  28,  30 
Leech,  breath  of,  hurtful  to  wounds 
after  eating  garlic  and  onions,  88  ; 
or  commerce  with  menstruating women,  88 
Leech,  intelligence  of,  23,  28 
Leech  should  beware  of  arsenic,  83, 85 
Leech,  the  fellow  of  the,  22,  112 
Leech,    the    qualities    required    by 
Arderne  in,  4-8 Leech,  the  temptations  of,  21 
Leech  to  be  skilled  in  giving  ene- mata,  75 
Leech  to  think  for  himself,  23,  34, 115 
Leech,  uncunning,  37,  38,  42,  86 Leeks  a  styptic,  67 
Leeks  bad  for  piles,  63 
Legs,  a  case  for  fistula  of,  46,  47 Lende?,  the,  34,  56 
Leonellus  films  regis  Angliae,  102 
Lepra,  95 
Leprosy,  piles  a  preventive  from, 
Lettuce,  101 
Lexington,  John  de,  107 
Lice  on  falcons,  to  destroy,  83 
Licium,  81,  84,  85,  97 
Licium  fails  to  cure  a  great  man,  86 
Licium,  preparation  of,  44 
Licium,  use  of,  in  wounds,  44,  4G 
84,85 Lientery,  62 


Index. 
147 
Ligature,  treatment  of  fistula  l>y,  29 
Ligatures,  leech  to  a  keep  a  stock  of, 30 
Lilium  medicinse  quoted,  38,  55 
Lily  oil,  12 
Lily  root,  68 
Limbs,  bruises  of,  97 
Lincoln,  102 
Linseed  oil,  28 
Lionel  Duke  of  Clarence,  103;  mar- 
riage of,  xxix 
Liquorice  a  good  vehicle  for  myro- bolans,  62 
List  bandages,  25,  26 
Litharge,  11 
Litharge  of  gold,  27 
Litharge  of  silver,  27 
Litharge,  powder  of,  54 
Lithargyrum,  varieties  of,  117 
Lithuanian  crusade.  114,  128 
Liver,  action  of,  on  the  bowels,  78 
Liver  pain,  95 
Liver  vein  of  the  arm,  54 
Lobster,  41 
Lombards  skilled  in  clysters.  76 
London,  102 
Londou,  men  of,  call  haemorrhoids 
piles,  55 
Longanon,   meaning   of  the   word, 109 
Longaon,  13,  14,  22,  32,  78 
Longaon,  chynnyngs  of,  71 
Longaon,  to  replace,  74 
Louis    XIV    of    France   cured     of 
fistula,  111 
Lumbaniy  ink,  67 
Lunse,  Nota  de  cognitione  signorum, 16 
Lupus,  the  urine  in,  60 
Lupus,  treatment  by  licium,  85 
Lure,  xii,  13,  22,  23,  24,  25,  2i'.,  2!', 30,  31,  33,  35,  38,  39,  40,  56,  58, 
61,  64,  65,  67,  69,  70,  71,  72,  73, 
74,  77 
Lure,  against  the  going  out  of,  74 
Lure,   aposteme  of,  treatment  for, 13 
Lure,  arrest  of  bleeding  from,  80 
Lure,  bubo  within,  37 
Lure,  cancer  of,  86 
Lure,  flux  of  blood  in,  55 
Lure,  inflammation  of  the,  11 
Lure,  itching  of,  73 
Lure,  meaning  of  the  word,  109 
Lutum  sapiem,  80 
Lutum  sapiencise,  the  preparation  of, 131 
Ly vane  juice,  73 
M,  meaning  of  the  symbol,  113 
McCaw,  Col.,  quoted,  xi,  xii,  xxxii 
Macrobius  quoted,  97,  133 
Mallard  grease,  12 
Mallow,  49 
Mallow  and  swine's  grease,  plaster 
of,  11 Mallow  leaves,  68 
Mallow,  varieties  of,  113 
Mallows,  an  ointment  of  tame,  12 
Mallows  for  a  clyster,  75 
Mammary  abscess,  a  plaster  for,  12 
Mammary  abscess,  treatment  of,  52 
Mammary   inflammation,  a   plaster 
for,  12 
Mandragora,  101 
Mania,  piles  a  preservative  from,  57 
Manipulug,  12,  113 
Manny,  Sir  Walter  de,  108 
Mantua,  103 
Marice,  80,  85,  86 
Marice,  arrest  of  bleeding  from,  80 
Marice,  cancer  of,  86 
Marice,  canker  of,  treated  by  licium, 85 
Marice,  meaning  of,  113 
Marigold,  juice  of,  52 
Marigold,  or  Calendula   officinalis, 121 
Massage  after  a  clyster,  77 
Massnge   for   chronic   constipation, 131 
Masters  in  surgery  superior  to  Bar- 
bers, xviii,  xix,  71 
Masters,  the  Four,  account  of,  123 
Mastic,  63,  65,  67 
Mastic  oil,  to  prepare,  95 
Masty,  Sir  John,  109 
Matfelon  is  jacea  nigra,  98 
Mayor  of  Northampton,  case  of,  32 
Meal,  barley,  41,  66 
Meal,  dusty,  72,  129 
Meal,  rye,  50 
Meal,  wheat,  48 
Medicine,  epochs  in,  ix 
Medicines  not  to  be  unduly  complex, 27 
Medicines    to    be   adapted    to    the 
patient,  25 Mediolani,  102 
Medlars  for  piles,  63 


148 Index. 
Megatechni,  110 
Mekisburg,  Will  de,  107 
Melancholia,   piles    a    preservative 
from,  57 
Melancholy  a  cause  of  piles,  56 
Melancholy  confined  in  the  spleen, 60 
Melancholy   confined    in    the   ga'l bladder,  60 
Melancholy,  indi,  62 
Melancholy,  its  cause,  57 
Melancholy,  signs  of,  60 
Melane,  102 
Melilote  or  Colewort,  73,  130 
Mel  rosar,  28,  81 
'  Mene,'  meaning  of,  108 Mene,  our  Lord  being,  3 
Menorrhagia,  purgatives  in,  62 
Menorrhagia,  treatment  of,  63 
Menstruating    women    harmful     to 
wounds,  88,  132 
Menstruation  provoked  by  bleeding 
from  internal  saphenous  vein,  61 
Menstruation  restrained  by  bleeding 
from  the  external  saphenous  vein, 
61 
Merch,  juice  of,  30 
Mercurialis,  juice  of.  93 
Mercurialis,   or    Good    Henry,   76, 130 
Mercury,  53 
Mesaraic  veins,  78 
Mesue,  the  plaster  of,  113 
Metacarpal  bones,  fistuloe  of,  46 
Micrology,  Master  Richard's,  quoted, 55,  73 
Microtechni,  110 
Milk,  a  good  vehicle  for  myrobalans, 
62 
Milk,  artifical  goat's,  72 
Milk,    goat's,    a   good    vehicle    for myrobalans,  63 
Milk,  goat's,  as  a  clyster,  72 Milk,  sour,  for  piles,  63 
Millefoile,  or  the  Yarrow,  63,  125 
Milne,    Dr.    Stewart,    quoted,   115, 120 
Mind,  the  effect  of,  on  the  body,  6, 
7Q )    O 
Minorite's  cure  for  fistula,  3,  110 Mint,  63 
Mirtield,  John,  xxix 
Mirobalans,  a  good   purgative,  62, 125 
Mirobalans,  for  a  clyster,  75 
Mirtellej,   or  garden    bramble,    63, 
102,  135 
Molayne,   or  Verbascum  Thapsus, 
30,  117 Mondeville,  Henri  de,  treatment  of 
fistula   by,   xvii,   xix ;   the   ideal 
surgeon    of,    xx  ;     formula     for 
Ungt.   Apostolicon,    130;    on   a 
hollow   ulcer,    133;     opinion    of 
realgar,  132;  on  Propoleos,  134; 
use  of  ink  by,  128 
Montford,  John  de,  109 
Montpellier,    medical    requirements 
at  the  University  of,  110 
Moon,  directions  to  find  the  house 
of,  16,  17 Moon,  influence  of,  on  the  body,  16, 
17,  21 Moon,  tables  to  find  the  house  of, 
16,  17 Moore,  Dr.  Norman,  quoted,  xxix 
Morale},  piles,  56 
Morfee,  57,  83,  95,  124 
Mormale,  meaning  of,  121 
Mormale,  piles  a  preservative  from, 57 
Mormale,  treatment  of,  53,  54 
Morphew,  meaning  of  the  term,  124 
Morphoea,  83 
Morphcea,  piles  a  preservative  from, 57 
Morstede,  Thomas,  xiv 
Mortification  of  fistula,  35 
Mouth,  cancer  of,  86 
Mouth,    cancer    of,    treatment    by licium,  85 
Mucilage  of  dragaunt  for  piles,  64 
Mucilage  of  gum-arabick  for  piles, 
64 
Mucilage  of  tragacanth,  126 
Mugvvort  or   artemisia,  30,  49,  50, 117 
Mulberry  piles,  56 
Mullein,  honey  of,  xxxii 
Mullein,  juice  of,  30,  64,  67,  73 
Mullein,  powers  of,  xxxi 
Mummy,  the  various-  forms  of,   in medicinal  use,  65,  67,  74,  127 
Mundification  of  a  wound,  27 
Mutton  fat,  73 
Myristica,  102,  135 
Myrrh,  27,  63 
Myrtle  for  piles,  63,  102,  135 
NAGHTSTACH,  xi;,  32 


149 
Nail,  dead,  treatment  of,  43,  44,  45 
Names  of  no  value,  83 
Narbonne  plaster,  42,  91 
Narboune,  pun  upon,  108 
Narbonne,  town  of,  1 
Narrow  (streit)  wounds,  treatment 
of,  98 
Nasal  polypus,  79 
Nastar,  xxvii,  26,  27,  29,  35,  36,  65, 67 
Nastar,  meaning  of,  113 
Nastar  of  tree,  11,  26,  27,  29,  30,  67 
Neat's  bladder,  preparation  of,  for an  enema,  75 
Neck,  the  source  of  all  spasmodic 
diseases,  103 
Need  hath  no  law,  62, 
Needle,  the  snouted,  9,  15,  24 
Neirbon,  a  pun  upon,  91 
Neirbon,  town  of,  1 
Nenufare,  102,  135 
Nerbon  plaster,  42,  91 
Nettle,  50 
Nettle  juice,  a  styptic,  66 
Nettle,  juice  of  red,  66,  79 
Nettle  juice,  the  medicinal  use  of, 128 
Nettle  tops,  66 
Newark,  41 
Newark,  Arderne  lived  in,  1 
Nicaise,  Prof.  E.,  ix 
Nitre,  53 
Noli-me-tangere,    meaning    of   the 
term,  125 
Noli-me-tangere,  the  urine  in,  60 
No!i-me-tangere,       treatment      by licinm,  85 
Northampton,  the  Mayor  of,  cured, 
2,  32 
Northamptonshire,  a   patient  from, 
with  rectal  cancer,  39 
Nose,  arrest  of  bleeding  from,  50 
Nose-bleeding,  to  stop,  66 
Nottingham,  a  case  of,  100 
Nottingham,  the  Mayor  of,  109 
Nutrient  enemata,  78 
Nux  moschata,  or  nutmeg,  102,  135 
OAK  bark,  74 
Oculus  lucidus,  85 
Oil  of  almonds,  to  prepare,  95 
Oil  of  camomile,  to  prepare,  26,  88, 
94 
Oil  of  crocus,  65 
Oil  of  juniper,  to  prepare,  96 
Oil  of  mastic,  to  prepare,  95 
Oil  of  roses,  26,  73,  92,  93 
Oil  of  rue,  76. 
Oil  of  violets,  36,  67,  68,  69,  73,  93, 100 
Oil  roset,  an  infusion  of,  11 
Oil  roset,  its  properties,  26,  93 
Ointment  of  mallows,  12 
Ointment  for  sleep,  101 
Ointment  for  spots  on  skin,  50 
Ointment  of  soap   and    brimstone, 
44,  46,  50 
Ointments,  a  method  of  melting,  90 
Old  men,  a  help  to,  95 
Oleum  seriacum,  preparation  of,  91 
01.  olivae,  26 
01.  roset,  11,  113 
Olibanum  or  frankincense,  65,  127 
Olivai,  65 
Olive  oil,  12,  26 
Onions,  bad  for  piles,  63 
Operation,  fees   for,  xx,  xxii,  xxiii, 
6,  15,  111 Operation  for  fistula,  22 
Operations,  an  ointment  to  produce atucsthesia  during,  101 
Opium,  69 Opium,  bridled  by  crocus,  101 
Opium,  miconis,  101 
Opium,  thebaic,  101 
Opium,  the  varieties  of,  134 
Oratio  Dominica,  103 
Orpiment  used  by  falconers,  83 
Orpine,  meaning  of  the  word,  128 
Orpment,  73 
Orpyne,  juice  of,  67 Ortment,  a  name  for  arsenic,  83 
Ostrich  feather,  the  Prince  of  Wales', xxvii,  130 
Oumfray,  Adam,  cured  of  fistula,  2 
Owles  and  buboes,  27 
Oyster  shell  for  melting  ointments, 
27,  30,  70,  90 
P,  meaning  of  the  symbol,  113 
Panis  cuculi,  67 
Pantechni,  110 
Pantegni,  110 
Pap,  children's,  72 Papaver  albus,  101 
Papaver  niger,  100 
Paralysis,  treatment  of,  96 
Parvencis,  or  the  periwinkle,  125 
Passcnham,  the  seneschal  of,  x 
Passio  iliaca,  a  clyster  for,  75,  78 


150 Index. 
Passio  iliaca  may  come  from  tenes- 
mus,  72  ;  meaning  of,  129 
Passio  iliaca,  signs  of,  59 
Passio  iliaca  to  be  distinguished 
from  piles,  58 
Passional-ins  Galeni,  the  authorship 
of,  123 
Passionary  of  Bartholomew  of  Sa- lerno, quoted,  55 
Passions  of  the  spleen,  piles  a  pre- servative from,  57 
Paternoster,  91,  103 
Patient,  addresses  to,  22 
Patients  are  now  impatient,  58 
Payne,  Dr.  J.  F.,  quoted,  xxxii,  113, 130 
Pears  for  piles,  63 
Pede  lyon,  or  lion's  leaf,  48, 120 Pellitory,  130 
Penile  fistula,  14 
Penny  used  as  a  measure,  54  ;  as  a 
weight,  64 
Perinseal  fistula,  13 
Periodic  clysters,  78 
Peritory,  74,  76 
Perseverance,  value  of,  3 
Persia,  king  of,  cured,  67,  128 
Persian  fire,  or  shingles,  133 
Pestilence  carbuncles,  81 
Pestilence,  the  first,  1,  107 
Pestilence,  the  second,  41,  119 
Petite  consoude,  or  the  daisy,  30, 117 
Petty  morel,  31 
Peyters,  town  of,  1  j  sack  of,  108 
Phlebotome,  125 
Phlebotomy,  after  treatment  of,  61 
Phlebotomy  and  astrology,  16,  17 
Phlebotomy  at  heel,  61 
Phlebotomy  a  preventive  of  piles, 62 
Phlebotomy,  infrequent,  a  cause  of 
piles,  57 Phlebotomy  in  piles,  60 
Phlebotomy  of  vena  salvatella,  61 
Phlebotomy,  periodic,  61 
Phlebotomy,  the  hour  for,  61 
Phlegm,  false,  58 
Phthisis  caused  by  piles,  57 
Pictagoras,  16,  17,  115 
Piles,  a  general  name  for  rectal  in- flammation, 55 
Piles,  operation  on  thrombosed,  70 
Piles  symptoms  of,  57 
Pilgrims  robbed  in  France,  101 
Pills  to  provoke  sleep,  101 
Piper  niger,  92 Piskre,  114 
Pitch  plaster,  81 
Plague  blotches,  81 
Plantagenet,  Henry,  xiii 
Plantain  for  piles,  40,  63,  74 
Plantain,  juice  of,  63 
Plantain  water,  63,  74 
Plaster,  good  for  the  gout,  96 
Plaster     of    mallow     and     swine's 
grease,  11 Plaster    of    Parts,    auripigmentum 
compared  to,  82 
Platearius,   quoted,  79  ;  account  of the  family  of,  131 
Pleurisy,  piles  a  preservative  from, 57 
Pliny,  quoted,  97;  account  of,  133 
Ploge,  1,  107 
Poitiers,  town  of,  1  ;  sack  of,  108 
Polypus  of  nose,  79 Pnintsgranate  flowers,  74 
Popilion,  69,  76,  129 
Popliteal   space   contains  only  fat, 48 
Poppy,  black,  100,  101 ;   white,  10 1 Populeon,  or  Aspen  ointment,  129 
Populi,  pulv.  salus,  90 Porcelane  for  piles,  63 
Porcelane,  or  purslane,  74,  126 
Porres,  juice  of,  45 
Porret,  meaning  of  the  word,  120 
Porrej  or  leeks,  juice  of,  67 Porris,  45,  50,  74 
Pott,  Percivall,  xiv 
Poudre  sanj  pere,  26,  86 
Powder  of  litharge,  54 
Powder  of  walnut,  97 
Powder  of  white  glass,  44,  54 
Prayer,  the  Lord's,  91,  103 Prayers  used  as  a  measure  of  time, 
xxix,  91,  133 
Probe,  xvii 
Prognosis,  advantages  of,  38 
Prognosis  from  amount  of  discharge in  fistula,  36 
Prognosis  from  bleeding  piles,  59 
Prognosis  of  fistuia  in  ano,  6,  15,  21 
Prognos's  of  fistula  in  fingers  and toes,  42,  47 
Prognosis,  reasons  for  assigning  too long  a  time,  6 
Prolapse,  King  Henry  IV  cured  of, xii,  74 


Index. 151 
Prolapse  of  anus,  xii,  74 
Prolapse  of  rectum,  74 
Propoleos,  or  bee  bread,  101,  134 
Proud  flesh,  44,  46,  51,  79,  80 
Pruritus  ani,  73 
Psidie,  or  pomegranate,  27,  65,  74, 
67,  117,  127 
Psillium,  74 
Ptholomeus,  or  Ptolemy,  the  Physi- 
cian, 16,  17,  115 
Ptisik  patients,  a  help  for,  95 
Purlins,  113 Pulv.  alkunet,  90 
Pulv.  alum,  67 
Pulv.  alum  jucarin  combust,  27 
Pulv.  arsenic,  85 
Pulv.  corrosiv.  65 
Pulv.  creoferoboron,  42,  44,  45,  46, 51 
Pulv.  creoferoboron  not  identified, 119 
Pulv.  cummin,  67 
Pulv.  Diatritonpipereon,  130 
Pulv.    grecus,    preparation    of,   41, 92 
Pulv.  hermodactile},  perhaps  colchi- cum,  81,  131 
Pulv.  humanus,  its  composition,  132 
Pulv.  incarnatyve,  53 
Pulv.  litharg.,  54 
Pul vis  sanguis  veneris,  receipts  for, 89 
Pulvis  sine  pari,  26,  28,  32,  34,  36, 
64,  65,  86,  87 
Pulvis  sine  pari  failed  once,  89 
Pulv.  salus  populi,  37,  40,  90 
Pulv.  trisantalorum,  74,  130 
Pulv.  vitriol:  combust,  79 
Pun  on  the  word  Neirbon,  91 
Puns  by  Arderne,  118 
Purgatives  a  cause  of  piles,  57 
Purgatives  a  cause  of  tenesmus,  72 
Purgatives  for  piles,  62,  64 
Puschej,  treatment  of,  52,  90,  91 
Pustules  cured  by  licium,  86 
Pustules  of  skin,  50 
Pustules,  treatment  of,  50,  51 
Putrid    flesh    destroyed    by    salus 
populi,  37,  42 
Putteuham,  Sir  Roger  de,  109 
Pythagoras,  16,  17,  115 
QUARTAN  ague,  piles  a  preservative 
from,  57 
Quicklime,  64,  92 
Quicksilver,  40,  53 
Quid  pro  quo,  27,  51,  65,  69,  72 
Quinces  for  piles,  63 
Quinque-nervia,  or  Ribwort,  for  piles, 
63,  126 
RAGADIEJ,  meaning  of,  13,  114 Rain  water,  63,  74 
Raisins    a   good  vehicle  for  myro- balans,  62 
Raisins,  preparation  of,  for  a  laxative, 
62 Ranula,  81 
Razor,  15,  24,  32,  43,  47,  49,  71 
Razor  and  lancet,ditference  between, 115 
Realgar,  82,  83,  132 
Rectal  examination,  importance  of, 39 
Rectal      feeding      advocated       by 
Arderne,  78,  131 
Rectal  ulceration,  37-38 
Reddcleve-on-Soar,  church  of,  109 
Rerepigre,  explanation  of  the  word, 130 
Rerepigre  fora  clyster,  75 
Rhagades,  a  cause  of  tenesmus,  13, 
36,  73 Rhazes,  account  of,  16,  17,  115 
Rhazes,  the  antidotary  of,  100 
Rhazes,  the  plaster  of,  113 
Rhazes,  white  ointment  of,  119 
Rheum,  what  it  is,  48 
Rhubarb,  juice  of,  40,  64,  68 
Ribald's  potion,  composition  of,  110, 134 
Ribalds  and  Trowans  in  France,  100 
Ribwort  for  piles,  63 
Richard  Anglicus,  account  of,  11, 
113,  123 
Richard,  Maister,  quoted,  55,  73 
Richmond,  the  honour  of,  108 
Rigbone,  meaning  of,  115 
Rigbone,  nerves  of,  70 
Rigbone,  the,  22,  34,  62,  70 
Rixi,  piles  due  to,  58 
Rije,  or  Rue,  63 
Roger  de  Barone,  or  Varone,  account 
of,  123 Roger,  Master,  account  of,  119,  123 
Rogerina,  account  of,  123 
Roland,  Maister,  of  Parma,  quoted, 
55;  account  of,  119,  123 Rose  oil,  26,  73 
Rose,  red,  74 


152 Index. 
Rose  water,  28,  63 
Roses,  oil  of,  preparation,  12,  92,  93 
Roset  water,  65 
Rasis,  or  Rhazes,  account  of,  115 
Ruby,  the  medicinal  use  of,  66 
Running  water,  74 
Ruprecht,  Knecht,  121 
Ruptorye  ointment,  14,  33 
Ruptorye  ointment,  formula  for,  118 
Rye  meal,  50,  51 
SALERXI,  regimen  sanitatis,  quoted. 119 
Salerno,  Gariopontus  of,  123 
Salerno,  position  of  medical  women 
at,  119 
Salerno,  the  regimen,  quoted,  119 
Salernum,  Archimathseus  of,  111 
Salernum,    Bartholomew    of,    123 ; 
formula  for  an  Ungt.  Apostolicon, 130 
Salicet,  William  de,  ideal  surgeon 
of,  xxiv;  quoted,  119,  121,  125; 
treatment  of  fistula,  xvi;  use  of 
ink  by,  128,  133 
Sal  nitri,  53 
Salt,  49,  50 
Salt  and  water  a  good  clyster,  76 
Salus  populi  ointment,  27,  28,  30, 90 
Salus  populi,  uses  of,  37,  40 
Salvatella  vein,  explanation  of,  121 
Sanguiboetes  plaster,  43,  44,  45,  47 
Sanguiboetes  plaster  not  identified, 119 
Sangtiinis    veneris  '  confectio,    90 ; 
pulv.,  89 Sanguis  draconis,  a  styptic,  25,  27, 
28,  38,  63,  65,  66,  116 
Sanguis   veneris,  xxix,  26,  28,  33, 
34,  35,  36,  76,  84,  87,  89,  90,  132 
Sank  damours  is  pulv.  sang,  veneris, 89 
Sank    de    pucell.    is    pulv.    gang. 
veneris,  89 
Santalum  for  piles,  63 
Saphena  vein,  bleeding  from,  55 
Saphena  vein,  innerj  phlebotomy  of, 
61 
Saphena  vein,  outer,  phlebotomy  of, 
61 
Saphena  veins,  anatomy  of,  61 
Saphire,  the  medicinal  use  of,  127 
Saracenic  soap,  118 
Sarcocolla,  '27;  explanation  of,  117 
Savoy  palace  burnt,  xi Scnb,  the,  81,  82,  83 
Scabies,  treatment  of,  by  Arderne, 
111 
Scabious  is  jacea  alba,  98 
Scabious,  juice  of,  98 
Scabious,  powers  of,  xxxi 
Scabious,  valence  of,  to  prepare,  97 
Scabious  with  a  heavenly  flower,  98 
Scammony,  a  cause  of  tenesmus,  63, 72 
Scammony  bad  for  piles,  63 
Scarification  for  piles,  62 
Scarification,  or  garsing,  52,  55 
Scarifying  a  wound,  52,  55 
Scariola,  or  chicory,  129 
Scariole  for  clyster,  72 
Scarth  of  pot,  or  potsherd,  82 
Schefeld,  John,  cured  of  fistula,  2 
Scorned  honey,  30,  40,  65,  73 
Scrope,  Archdeacon   of  Richmond, 
Yorkshire,  114 
Scrope,  Lord,  114 
Scrope,  Master  Giffray,  14 
Scrope,  Sir  Geoffrey,  114 
Scrope,  Sir  Henry  le,  114 
Scrope,  Stephen,  114 Scrotal  sinuses,  13 
Secrecy  enjoined  on  leech  lest  bar- bers learn,  71 
Secrecy  inculcated,  8,  15,  29,  30,  71, 
103,  114 
Secrets  to  be  kept,  8 
Sengrene  is  rhubarb,  64 
"  Sequere  me,"  the  probe,  xvii,  8, 
15,  22,  33,  112 
Sequestrum,  Arderue  removes  a,  85 
Serapion,     also     known     as     John 
Damascene,  124 
Serapion,  the  younger,  113 
Sharp,  Samuel,  x 
Shears,  26,  87,  92 
Sheep's  tallow,  49,  73 Sheffield,  John,  2,  108 
Shelforde  by  Nottingham,  the  priest 
of,  cured,  2 
Shins,  treatment  of  injuries  to,  88,  98 
Shirland,  near  Chesterfield,  2 
Shirland,  Sir  Reginald  Grey  of,  109 
Shooters'   Hill  known  to  Arderne, 
XXX 
Signs  of  danger  in  bleeding  piles,  50 
Silence,  the  value  of,  6,  8 
Silk,  white,  leech  to  keep  a  stock  of, 
30 


Index. 153 
Simple  men,  God  reveals  things  to the,  2 
Siriacum  oleum,  91 
Siringa,  the  syringe,  9,  112 
Skin,  an  ointment  for  spots  on,  50 
Skin,  flayings  and  excoriations  of, 
36,  40,  43,  46,  51,  90 
Sklyse,  a,  31 
Sleep,  a  powder  to  produce,  100 
Sleep,  ointment  and  pills  to  provoke, 101 
Sleep,  to  awaken  a  man  from,  101, 102 
Slip  knot,  29 
Smalacli,  juice  of,  30 
Smalach,  or  parsley,  49,  117 
Snail,  black,  53 
Snaith,  1 ;   priory  of,  108 
Sneezing     of    menstruous    woman 
hurtful  to  wounds,  88 
Snouted  needle,  9,  15,  24 
Soap  and  brimstone  ointment,  44,  4G 
Soap  and  sulphur  ointment,  46,  50 
Soap,  black  and  white,  76,  118 
Solsequium,  or  endive,  juice  of,  52, 121 
Sour  milk  for  piles,  63 
Spain,  king  of,  xi 
Sparge,  or  cataputia  minor,  30,  117 
Spasm,  charm  against,  102 
Spatome,  or  spatula,  31,  40,  48,  69. 
92,  93,  96 
Spleen,  diseases  of,  60 
Spleen  pain,  95 
Spleen,  piles  a  preservative  from  the 
passions  of  the,  57 
Spleen,  the  prison  of  melancholy,  60 
Spodin  for  piles,  63 
Sponge  used  for  staunching  blood, 
24,  25,  32,  70 
Sponges,  15,  24 
Spoon,  the  cochlear,  24 
Sprains,  treatment  of,  94,  97 
Squibula,  38,  76,  77,  78 
St.   Anthony's    fire,    or   ergotinism, 133 
Sternutories,  102 
Stick,  injuries  from,  54 
Stoke  Bardolf,  Notts.,  107 
Stomach,  abhominaciones  of,  95, 133 
Stomach  ache,  95 
Stomach,  remedies  to  comfort,  95 
Stomach,  the  urine  in  diseases  of,  GO 
Stones,  injuries  from,  52,  54 
Stopporte  in  Cheshire,  109 
Storax,  63,  126 
Strains,  treatment  of,  94,  97 
Stupes,  25,  26,  28,  32,  44, 49,  67,  87, 100 
Styptic  herbs,  63 
Styptic  powder,  41 
Styptics,  Arderne's  use  of,  116 Styptics   for  blood,  15,  24,  25,  41, 
65,  66,  74 Succus  apii,  50 
Suffumigation,  74 
Sugar,  58 
Sulphur,  40,  46,  48 
Sulphur  and  soap  ointment,  46,  50 
Sulphur  water,  82 
Sumak  for  piles,  63,  67 
Sun,  influence  of,  on  disease.  21 
Sunburn,  treatment  of,  95 
Superfluous  flesh,  79,  80 
Surgeon,  the  ideal,  xix 
Surgeon,  the  qualities  required  in, 
by  Arderne,  4 
Surgeons,  dangers  incurred  by,  xsvii 
Surgeons,  the  Master,  xviii Sweating  a  treatment  for  piles,  63 
Swine's  bladder,  preparation  of,  for an  enema,  75 
Swine's    dung,    medicinal    use    of, 128 
Swine's  grease  and  mallow  plaster, 11 
Swooning  a  result  of  tenesmus,  72 
Swooning  of  a  patient  after  opera- tion, and  treatment  of,  32,  33 
Sword  wounds,  treatment  of,  52 
Swyne's  grease,  68,  69 Syringe,  use  of,  33,  34,  95 
Syryng,  33,  34,  95 
TALLOW,  49,  90 
Tallow  of  goats,  73  ;  hart,  90;  pig, 
97  ;  sheep,  73,  90,  92 
Tame  mallows,  12 
Tanny  powder,  27 Tansy,  74 
Tapsibarbastus  and  mel  com- 
pounded, 73 
Tapsimel,  xxxii,  35,  36,  40,  65,  92, 117 
Tapsimel,  preparation  of,  23,  31 
Tapsivalencia,  preparation  of,  xxxi, 69 
Tartar,  46 
Tartar  of  ale,  49 
Tartar  water,  receipt  for,  52 


154 Index. 
Techni  of  Hippocrates,  110 
Teeth,  a  remedy  for  disease  of,  81 
Tenasmon,  39,  56,  71 
Tenasmon,  prognosis  of,  72 
Tenasmon,  signs  of,  71 
Tenasmon,  treatment  of,  72 
Tendiculum,  the  dilator,  xvii,  9,  15, 
23,  24,  112 
Tenesmus,  see  Tenasmon,  71 
Tent,  use  of,  for  draining  wounds* 32 
Tent,  wooden,  48 
Tents,  34,  48,  100 
Tents  of  lard,  48 
Tents  of  linen,  32 
Tents,  to  anchor,  34 
Terebentyne,  31 
Terra  sigilluta,  or  Lemnos  earth,  27, 117 
Testicles,  cure  of  fistula  in,  2 
Testicles,  means  of  cooling,  66 
Testudo  nigra,  53 
Tetter,  the,  83 
Theodoric,  113,  119 
Theriaca  hyoscyami,  102 
Thread,  leech  to  keep  a  stock  of,  30 
Thread,  the  fourfold,  23 
Thrombosed  piles,  71 
Thrush,  treatment  of,  32 
Thumbs,  fistulse  of,  42 
Thus  albus,  63,  95 
Tickhill,  near  Bri3twell,  2,  108 
Time    measured    by    recitation   of 
prayers,  xxix,  91 
Tinder,  a  styptic,  25,  66 
Toad,  skin  coloured  like  that  of  a, 49 
Tongs,  Arderne's  dilating,  35 Toulouse,  1 ;  capture  of,  108 
Towell,  2;  the  meaning  of  the  word, 109 
Treacle  of  castoreum,  102 
Treacle  of  hyoscyamus,  102 
Trisantalorum,  or  confection  of  san- 
dal, 130 
Trochistes,  a  plaster  made  into,  91 
Trowans  and  ribalds  in  France,  100 
Truant,  meaning  of  the  word,  134 
Turchill  de  Warwic,  x 
Turpentine,  31,  37 
Tuxford  in  the  Clay,  1,  107 
Twelve  Apostles,  ointment  of  the, 130 
ULCERATION,  a  cause  of  tenesmus,  72 
Ulceration,   chronic,    of  leg,  a  case 
of,  53 Ulceration  of  rectum,  37,  38 
Ulcers,  cancerous,  81,  86 
Ulcers,  fraudulent,  79 
Ulcers  not  all  buboes,  36 
Ulcers  not  to  be  dressed  too  often,  87 
Ulcus  concavurn,  133 
Ulcus  undesiccable,  13,  114 
Unguentum  2Egyptiacuu),  119 
Unguentum  album,  28,  40,  47,  54, 
119 
Unguentum  Apostolicon,  130 
Unguentum   Apostolorum,   formula 
for,  130 
Unguentum  arabicum,  28,  35,  71,92 
Unguentum  citrinum,  65 
Unguentum  dyuelyn,  53,  54 
Unguentum  fuscum,  50 
Unguentum  Gratia  Dei,  130 
Unguentum  licium,  44 
Unguentum  Neyrbone.  33,  34 
Unguentum  nigrum,  its  composition 
and  preparation  of,  54 
Unguentum  ruptorium,  14,  33,  118 
Unguentum  sambuci,  114 
Unguentum  tupsivalentium,  69 
Unguentum  Veneris,  130 
Unguentum  vetus,  74 
Unguentum  viride,  27,  43,  44,  46, 
54,  119 Unguentum  viride  grjeci,  53 
Universities,  approximate  dates  of, ix 
Unkunnyng  leeches,  37,  38,  42,  86 
Untholefulness  of  patients,  comment 
on,  58 Urethral  fistula,  14,  32 
Urinary  fistula,  14 
Urine,  burning  of  the,  95 
Urine    in    disease   of  the   stomach 
peassyue,  i.e.  green  or  eruginous, 
60 Urine  in  noli-me-tangere,  60 
Urine,  the  condition  of,  in  piles,  59 
Urine  the,  in  lupus,  60 
Uve,  piles,  56 
VALENCE  of  scabious,  129 
Valence  of  scabious,  to  prepare,  97, 
129 
Valence  of  scabious,  why  so  called, 
98 Valence  of  tapsibarbastus,  C9 
Valence  of  wormode,  98 


Index. 155 
Valentia  scabious,  xxxi 
Varone,  Roger  de,  account  of,  123 
Veins,  anatomy  of  saphenous,  61 
Vena  basilica,  54 
Vena  hepatica,  explanation  of  the 
term,  121 
Vena  hepatica  of  arm,  121 
Vena  kilyuj,  its  anatomy,  57 Vena  mesaraica,  78 
Vena  salvatella,  anatomy  of,  125 
Vena  salvatella,  bleeding  from,  61 
Veneris   pulv.  sanguinis,  xxix,  26, 
28,  33,  89,  90, 
Venomous  apostemes,  81 
Ventose,    or    cupping  instruments, 120 
Ventosyng,  or  cupping,  62 
Verbr.m  caro  factum  est,  104,  135 
"  Verbum  caro  factum,"  value  of  the words  against  evil,  135 
Verdigris,  49,  50 
Vermilion,  82 
Vertgrese,  65,  86 
Vertgrese,  its  properties,  82 
Verucale3  piles,  56 
Vervain,  63,  74 
Violet,  76 
Violet  oil,  67,  69,  73 
Violet  oil,  a  method  of  preparing, 93 
Virga  pastoris,  or  the  Teasel,  40,  119 
Virgins  rare,  90 
Viride  es,  82 
Viride  graeci  ungt,  53 
Virtues  in  woods,  stones,  and  herbs, 104 
Vitriol,  64,  65,  40,  41 
Vitriol  combust,  86 
Vitriol  plaster,  preparation  of,  81 
Vitriol,  uses  of,  79,  80 
Vitriol,  varieties  of,  79 
Vitriole?,  varieties  of,  79 
Vitriolura  arabicum,  79 
Vitriolum  ciprinum,  79 
Vitriolum  combustum,  79 
Vitriolum  romanum,  79 
WALES',  Prince  of,  plumes,  xxvii Wales,  Prince  of  (the  Black  Prince), mentioned,  2,  3 
Walwort,  juice  of,  25,  97 
Walwort,  powder  of,  25,  97 
Wai  wort,  the  dwarf  elder,  30,  49, 
50,  66,  116,  117,  133 
Walwort,  the  virtues  of,  97 
Warsop,  hamlet  of,  107 
Water,  cold,  a  styptic,  66 Watercress,  76 
Water  of  almonds,  to  prepare,  95 
Water  of  alum,  82 
Water  of  plantain,  63,  74 
Water  of  sulphur,  82 
Wax,  virgin,  30 
Welked,  meaning  of  word,  129 
Wet  cupping  for  piles,  62 
Weybread,  or  Plantain,  117 
Wheat  bran  for  a  clyster,  75 
Wheat  flour,  32 
Wheaten  meal,  48,  63 
Whey,   a  good   vehicle  for  myro- balans,  62 
White     Friars     church,     a,     John 
Arderne  buried  in,  134 
White  Friars,  the  church  of  the,  133 White  of  egg,  54 
White  ointment,  varieties  of,  54, 119 
White  poppy,  101 
Whitlow,  the,  42 
Wild  fire,  an  ointment  for,  91 
Wild  fire,  or  eysipelas,  40,  133 
Wilton,   Lord    Grey    of,    cured    of fistula,  2 
Wind  relieved  by  a  clyster,  28 
Wine,  great,  63 Wine  to  be  used  for  wetting  licium, 86 
Wiseman,  Eichard,  xiv 
Witty  men,  28,  30 
Womb,  25,  26,  30,  39,  56,  59,  62,  63, 
77,  78,  97 
Womb,  purging  of,  71 Wombe,  meaning  of,  113 
Women,  medical,  position  of,  at  the 
school  of  Salerno,  119 
Women,   menstruating,   hurtful   to 
wounds,  88,  132 
Woodall,  John,  xiv 
Woodbine,  30 
Woodbine,  juice  of,  44 
Woodbynd,  or  woodbine,  117 Wooden  tent,  48 
Woodsour  or  alleluia,  68 
Woods,  stones  and  herbs,  virtues'  in, 104,  135 
Wormode,  or  wormwood,  30,  117, 174 
Wormwood,  valence  of,  98 
Wound,  signs  of  a  mundified,  27 
Wounds,  incurable,    treatment    of, 96 


156 Index. 
Wounds  not  to  be  dressed  too  often, 87 
Wounds,  the  drier  the  better,  28 
Wounds,  treatment  of,  98,  100 
Wounds,  when  to  be  re-dressed,  88 
Wrayste,  the,  xvii,  9,  23,  24,  112 
Wyne,  great,  63 
YARD,  burning  of,  96 
Ydropsy,  piles  a  preservative  from, 57 
Yera  pigra,  130 
Yerd,  cancer  of,  92 
Yolks  of  egg,  11,  65.     See  Egg 
Ypocras,  21,  115 
Ypoquistid,  or  Hypocistis,  for  piles, 
63,  126 
3EKYNG,  treatment  of,  52 
Zingiber,  68 
3i3annie,  or  tares,  100,  134 Zodiac  and  surgery,  16 
^ucaryne  alum.  81 
3uccary,  or  sugar,  68 
Richard  Clay  &  eiyns,  limited  London  and  Jiungay. 






5 ad 
PRATT 
1*4888^ 
DEC 




